Microsoft Windows is a group of several graphical operating system families, all of which are developed, marketed, and sold by Microsoft. Each family caters to a certain sector of the computing industry. Active Windows families include Windows NT and Windows Embedded; these may encompass subfamilies, e.g. Windows Embedded Compact (Windows CE) or Windows Server. Defunct Windows families include Windows 9x, Windows Mobile and Windows Phone.

Microsoft introduced an operating environment named Windows on November 20, 1985, as a graphical operating system shell for MS-DOS in response to the growing interest in graphical user interfaces (GUIs).[3] Microsoft Windows came to dominate the world's personal computer (PC) market with over 90% market share, overtaking Mac OS, which had been introduced in 1984. Apple came to see Windows as an unfair encroachment on their innovation in GUI development as implemented on products such as the Lisa and Macintosh (eventually settled in court in Microsoft's favor in 1993). On PCs, Windows is still the most popular operating system. However, in 2014, Microsoft admitted losing the majority of the overall operating system market to Android,[4] because of the massive growth in sales of Android smartphones. In 2014, the number of Windows devices sold was less than 25% that of Android devices sold. This comparison however may not be fully relevant, as the two operating systems traditionally target different platforms. Still, numbers for server use of Windows (that are comparable to competitors) show one third market share, similar to for end user use.

As of December 2017, the most recent version of Windows for PCs, tablets, smartphones and embedded devices is Windows 10. The most recent versions for server computers is Windows Server 2016. A specialized version of Windows runs on the Xbox One video game console.[5]

Contents  [hide]
1	Genealogy
1.1	By marketing role
2	Version history
2.1	Early versions
2.2	Windows 3.x
2.3	Windows 9x
2.4	Windows NT
2.4.1	Early versions
2.4.2	Windows XP
2.4.3	Windows Vista
2.4.4	Windows 7
2.4.5	Windows 8 and 8.1
2.4.6	Windows 10
2.4.7	Multilingual support
2.4.8	Platform support
2.5	Windows CE
2.6	Xbox OS
3	Version control system
4	Timeline of releases
5	Usage share and device sales
5.1	Usage share on servers
6	Security
6.1	File permissions
6.2	Windows Defender
6.3	Third-party analysis
7	Alternative implementations
8	See also
9	References
10	External links
Genealogy
By marketing role
Microsoft, the developer of Windows, has registered several trademarks each of which denote a family of Windows operating systems that target a specific sector of the computing industry. As of 2014, the following Windows families are being actively developed:

Windows NT: Started as a family of operating system with Windows NT 3.1, an operating system for server computers and workstations. It now consists of three operating system subfamilies that are released almost at the same time and share the same kernel. It is almost impossible for someone unfamiliar with the subject to identify the members of this family by name because they do not adhere to any specific rule; e.g. Windows 7 and Windows 8.1 are members of this family but Windows 3.1 is not.
Windows: The operating system for mainstream personal computers, tablets and smartphones. The latest version is Windows 10. The main competitor of this family is macOS by Apple Inc. for personal computers and Android for mobile devices (c.f. Usage share of operating systems § Market share by category).
Windows Server: The operating system for server computers. The latest version is Windows Server 2016. Unlike its clients sibling, it has adopted a strong naming scheme. The main competitor of this family is Linux. (c.f. Usage share of operating systems § Market share by category)
Windows PE: A lightweight version of its Windows sibling meant to operate as a live operating system, used for installing Windows on bare-metal computers (especially on many computers at once), recovery or troubleshooting purposes. The latest version is Windows PE 10.
Windows Embedded: Initially, Microsoft developed Windows CE as a general-purpose operating system for every device that was too resource-limited to be called a full-fledged computer. Eventually, however, Windows CE was renamed Windows Embedded Compact and was folded under Windows Compact trademark which also consists of Windows Embedded Industry, Windows Embedded Professional, Windows Embedded Standard, Windows Embedded Handheld and Windows Embedded Automotive.[6]
The following Windows families are no longer being developed:

Windows 9x: An operating system that targeted consumers market. Discontinued because of suboptimal performance. (PC World called its last version, Windows ME, one of the worst products of all times.)[7] Microsoft now caters to the consumers market with Windows NT.
Windows Mobile: The predecessor to Windows Phone, it was a mobile phone operating system. The first version was called Pocket PC 2000; the third version, Windows Mobile 2003 is the first version to adopt the Windows Mobile trademark. The last version is Windows Mobile 6.5.
Windows Phone: An operating system sold only to manufacturers of smartphones. The first version was Windows Phone 7, followed by Windows Phone 8, and the last version Windows Phone 8.1. It was succeeded by Windows 10 Mobile.
Version history
Main article: History of Microsoft Windows
See also: List of Microsoft Windows versions
The term Windows collectively describes any or all of several generations of Microsoft operating system products. These products are generally categorized as follows:

Early versions
Main articles: Windows 1.0, Windows 2.0, and Windows 2.1x

Windows 1.0, the first version, released in 1985
The history of Windows dates back to 1981, when Microsoft started work on a program called "Interface Manager". It was announced in November 1983 (after the Apple Lisa, but before the Macintosh) under the name "Windows", but Windows 1.0 was not released until November 1985.[8] Windows 1.0 was to compete with Apple's operating system, but achieved little popularity. Windows 1.0 is not a complete operating system; rather, it extends MS-DOS. The shell of Windows 1.0 is a program known as the MS-DOS Executive. Components included Calculator, Calendar, Cardfile, Clipboard viewer, Clock, Control Panel, Notepad, Paint, Reversi, Terminal and Write. Windows 1.0 does not allow overlapping windows. Instead all windows are tiled. Only modal dialog boxes may appear over other windows.

Windows 2.0 was released in December 1987, and was more popular than its predecessor. It features several improvements to the user interface and memory management.[9] Windows 2.03 changed the OS from tiled windows to overlapping windows. The result of this change led to Apple Computer filing a suit against Microsoft alleging infringement on Apple's copyrights.[10][11] Windows 2.0 also introduced more sophisticated keyboard shortcuts and could make use of expanded memory.

Windows 2.1 was released in two different versions: Windows/286 and Windows/386. Windows/386 uses the virtual 8086 mode of the Intel 80386 to multitask several DOS programs and the paged memory model to emulate expanded memory using available extended memory. Windows/286, in spite of its name, runs on both Intel 8086 and Intel 80286 processors. It runs in real mode but can make use of the high memory area.[citation needed]

In addition to full Windows-packages, there were runtime-only versions that shipped with early Windows software from third parties and made it possible to run their Windows software on MS-DOS and without the full Windows feature set.

The early versions of Windows are often thought of as graphical shells, mostly because they ran on top of MS-DOS and use it for file system services.[12] However, even the earliest Windows versions already assumed many typical operating system functions; notably, having their own executable file format and providing their own device drivers (timer, graphics, printer, mouse, keyboard and sound). Unlike MS-DOS, Windows allowed users to execute multiple graphical applications at the same time, through cooperative multitasking. Windows implemented an elaborate, segment-based, software virtual memory scheme, which allows it to run applications larger than available memory: code segments and resources are swapped in and thrown away when memory became scarce; data segments moved in memory when a given application had relinquished processor control.

Windows 3.x
Main articles: Windows 3.0 and Windows 3.1x

Windows 3.0, released in 1990
Windows 3.0, released in 1990, improved the design, mostly because of virtual memory and loadable virtual device drivers (VxDs) that allow Windows to share arbitrary devices between multi-tasked DOS applications.[citation needed] Windows 3.0 applications can run in protected mode, which gives them access to several megabytes of memory without the obligation to participate in the software virtual memory scheme. They run inside the same address space, where the segmented memory provides a degree of protection. Windows 3.0 also featured improvements to the user interface. Microsoft rewrote critical operations from C into assembly. Windows 3.0 is the first Microsoft Windows version to achieve broad commercial success, selling 2 million copies in the first six months.[13][14]

Windows 3.1, made generally available on March 1, 1992, featured a facelift. In August 1993, Windows for Workgroups, a special version with integrated peer-to-peer networking features and a version number of 3.11, was released. It was sold along Windows 3.1. Support for Windows 3.1 ended on December 31, 2001.[15]

Windows 3.2, released 1994, is an updated version of the Chinese version of Windows 3.1.[16] The update was limited to this language version, as it fixed only issues related to the complex writing system of the Chinese language.[17] Windows 3.2 was generally sold by computer manufacturers with a ten-disk version of MS-DOS that also had Simplified Chinese characters in basic output and some translated utilities.

Windows 9x
Main article: Windows 9x
The next major consumer-oriented release of Windows, Windows 95, was released on August 24, 1995. While still remaining MS-DOS-based, Windows 95 introduced support for native 32-bit applications, plug and play hardware, preemptive multitasking, long file names of up to 255 characters, and provided increased stability over its predecessors. Windows 95 also introduced a redesigned, object oriented user interface, replacing the previous Program Manager with the Start menu, taskbar, and Windows Explorer shell. Windows 95 was a major commercial success for Microsoft; Ina Fried of CNET remarked that "by the time Windows 95 was finally ushered off the market in 2001, it had become a fixture on computer desktops around the world."[18] Microsoft published four OEM Service Releases (OSR) of Windows 95, each of which was roughly equivalent to a service pack. The first OSR of Windows 95 was also the first version of Windows to be bundled with Microsoft's web browser, Internet Explorer.[19] Mainstream support for Windows 95 ended on December 31, 2000, and extended support for Windows 95 ended on December 31, 2001.[20]

Windows 95 was followed up with the release of Windows 98 on June 25, 1998, which introduced the Windows Driver Model, support for USB composite devices, support for ACPI, hibernation, and support for multi-monitor configurations. Windows 98 also included integration with Internet Explorer 4 through Active Desktop and other aspects of the Windows Desktop Update (a series of enhancements to the Explorer shell which were also made available for Windows 95). In May 1999, Microsoft released Windows 98 Second Edition, an updated version of Windows 98. Windows 98 SE added Internet Explorer 5.0 and Windows Media Player 6.2 amongst other upgrades. Mainstream support for Windows 98 ended on June 30, 2002, and extended support for Windows 98 ended on July 11, 2006.[21]

On September 14, 2000, Microsoft released Windows ME (Millennium Edition), the last DOS-based version of Windows. Windows ME incorporated visual interface enhancements from its Windows NT-based counterpart Windows 2000, had faster boot times than previous versions (which however, required the removal of the ability to access a real mode DOS environment, removing compatibility with some older programs),[22] expanded multimedia functionality (including Windows Media Player 7, Windows Movie Maker, and the Windows Image Acquisition framework for retrieving images from scanners and digital cameras), additional system utilities such as System File Protection and System Restore, and updated home networking tools.[23] However, Windows ME was faced with criticism for its speed and instability, along with hardware compatibility issues and its removal of real mode DOS support. PC World considered Windows ME to be one of the worst operating systems Microsoft had ever released, and the 4th worst tech product of all time.[7]

Windows NT
Main article: Windows NT
Early versions
In November 1988, a new development team within Microsoft (which included former Digital Equipment Corporation developers Dave Cutler and Mark Lucovsky) began work on a revamped version of IBM and Microsoft's OS/2 operating system known as "NT OS/2". NT OS/2 was intended to be a secure, multi-user operating system with POSIX compatibility and a modular, portable kernel with preemptive multitasking and support for multiple processor architectures. However, following the successful release of Windows 3.0, the NT development team decided to rework the project to use an extended 32-bit port of the Windows API known as Win32 instead of those of OS/2. Win32 maintained a similar structure to the Windows APIs (allowing existing Windows applications to easily be ported to the platform), but also supported the capabilities of the existing NT kernel. Following its approval by Microsoft's staff, development continued on what was now Windows NT, the first 32-bit version of Windows. However, IBM objected to the changes, and ultimately continued OS/2 development on its own.[24][25]

The first release of the resulting operating system, Windows NT 3.1 (named to associate it with Windows 3.1) was released in July 1993, with versions for desktop workstations and servers. Windows NT 3.5 was released in September 1994, focusing on performance improvements and support for Novell's NetWare, and was followed up by Windows NT 3.51 in May 1995, which included additional improvements and support for the PowerPC architecture. Windows NT 4.0 was released in June 1996, introducing the redesigned interface of Windows 95 to the NT series. On February 17, 2000, Microsoft released Windows 2000, a successor to NT 4.0. The Windows NT name was dropped at this point in order to put a greater focus on the Windows brand.[25]

Windows XP
Main article: Windows XP
The next major version of Windows NT, Windows XP, was released on October 25, 2001. The introduction of Windows XP aimed to unify the consumer-oriented Windows 9x series with the architecture introduced by Windows NT, a change which Microsoft promised would provide better performance over its DOS-based predecessors. Windows XP would also introduce a redesigned user interface (including an updated Start menu and a "task-oriented" Windows Explorer), streamlined multimedia and networking features, Internet Explorer 6, integration with Microsoft's .NET Passport services, modes to help provide compatibility with software designed for previous versions of Windows, and Remote Assistance functionality.[26]

At retail, Windows XP was now marketed in two main editions: the "Home" edition was targeted towards consumers, while the "Professional" edition was targeted towards business environments and power users, and included additional security and networking features. Home and Professional were later accompanied by the "Media Center" edition (designed for home theater PCs, with an emphasis on support for DVD playback, TV tuner cards, DVR functionality, and remote controls), and the "Tablet PC" edition (designed for mobile devices meeting its specifications for a tablet computer, with support for stylus pen input and additional pen-enabled applications).[27][28][29] Mainstream support for Windows XP ended on April 14, 2009. Extended support ended on April 8, 2014.[30]

After Windows 2000, Microsoft also changed its release schedules for server operating systems; the server counterpart of Windows XP, Windows Server 2003, was released in April 2003.[25] It was followed in December 2005, by Windows Server 2003 R2.

Windows Vista
Main article: Windows Vista
After a lengthy development process, Windows Vista was released on November 30, 2006, for volume licensing and January 30, 2007, for consumers. It contained a number of new features, from a redesigned shell and user interface to significant technical changes, with a particular focus on security features. It was available in a number of different editions, and has been subject to some criticism, such as drop of performance, longer boot time, criticism of new UAC, and stricter license agreement. Vista's server counterpart, Windows Server 2008 was released in early 2008.

Windows 7
Main article: Windows 7
On July 22, 2009, Windows 7 and Windows Server 2008 R2 were released as RTM (release to manufacturing) while the former was released to the public 3 months later on October 22, 2009. Unlike its predecessor, Windows Vista, which introduced a large number of new features, Windows 7 was intended to be a more focused, incremental upgrade to the Windows line, with the goal of being compatible with applications and hardware with which Windows Vista was already compatible.[31] Windows 7 has multi-touch support, a redesigned Windows shell with an updated taskbar, a home networking system called HomeGroup,[32] and performance improvements.

Windows 8 and 8.1
Main articles: Windows 8 and Windows 8.1
Windows 8, the successor to Windows 7, was released generally on October 26, 2012. A number of significant changes were made on Windows 8, including the introduction of a user interface based around Microsoft's Metro design language with optimizations for touch-based devices such as tablets and all-in-one PCs. These changes include the Start screen, which uses large tiles that are more convenient for touch interactions and allow for the display of continually updated information, and a new class of apps which are designed primarily for use on touch-based devices. Other changes include increased integration with cloud services and other online platforms (such as social networks and Microsoft's own OneDrive (formerly SkyDrive) and Xbox Live services), the Windows Store service for software distribution, and a new variant known as Windows RT for use on devices that utilize the ARM architecture.[33][34][35][36][37][38] An update to Windows 8, called Windows 8.1,[39] was released on October 17, 2013, and includes features such as new live tile sizes, deeper OneDrive integration, and many other revisions. Windows 8 and Windows 8.1 has been subject to some criticism, such as removal of the Start menu.

Windows 10
Main article: Windows 10
On September 30, 2014, Microsoft announced Windows 10 as the successor to Windows 8.1. It was released on July 29, 2015, and addresses shortcomings in the user interface first introduced with Windows 8. Changes include the return of the Start Menu, a virtual desktop system, and the ability to run Windows Store apps within windows on the desktop rather than in full-screen mode. Windows 10 is said to be available to update from qualified Windows 7 with SP1 and Windows 8.1 computers from the Get Windows 10 Application (for Windows 7, Windows 8.1) or Windows Update (Windows 7).[40]

On November 12, 2015, an update to Windows 10, version 1511, was released.[41] This update can be activated with a Windows 7, 8 or 8.1 product key as well as Windows 10 product keys.[42] Features include new icons and right-click context menus, default printer management, four times as many tiles allowed in the Start menu, Find My Device, and Edge updates.[42]

In February 2017, Microsoft announced the migration of its Windows source code repository from Perforce to Git. This migration involved 3.5 million separate files in a 300 gigabyte repository.[43] By May 2017, 90 percent of its engineering team now uses Git, in about 8500 commits and 1760 Windows builds per day.[43]

Multilingual support
Multilingual support is built into Windows. The language for both the keyboard and the interface can be changed through the Region and Language Control Panel. Components for all supported input languages, such as Input Method Editors, are automatically installed during Windows installation (in Windows XP and earlier, files for East Asian languages, such as Chinese, and right-to-left scripts, such as Arabic, may need to be installed separately, also from the said Control Panel). Third-party IMEs may also be installed if a user feels that the provided one is insufficient for their needs.

Interface languages for the operating system are free for download, but some languages are limited to certain editions of Windows. Language Interface Packs (LIPs) are redistributable and may be downloaded from Microsoft's Download Center and installed for any edition of Windows (XP or later) – they translate most, but not all, of the Windows interface, and require a certain base language (the language which Windows originally shipped with). This is used for most languages in emerging markets. Full Language Packs, which translates the complete operating system, are only available for specific editions of Windows (Ultimate and Enterprise editions of Windows Vista and 7, and all editions of Windows 8, 8.1 and RT except Single Language). They do not require a specific base language, and are commonly used for more popular languages such as French or Chinese. These languages cannot be downloaded through the Download Center, but available as optional updates through the Windows Update service (except Windows 8).

The interface language of installed applications are not affected by changes in the Windows interface language. Availability of languages depends on the application developers themselves.

Windows 8 and Windows Server 2012 introduces a new Language Control Panel where both the interface and input languages can be simultaneously changed, and language packs, regardless of type, can be downloaded from a central location. The PC Settings app in Windows 8.1 and Windows Server 2012 R2 also includes a counterpart settings page for this. Changing the interface language also changes the language of preinstalled Windows Store apps (such as Mail, Maps and News) and certain other Microsoft-developed apps (such as Remote Desktop). The above limitations for language packs are however still in effect, except that full language packs can be installed for any edition except Single Language, which caters to emerging markets.

Platform support
Windows NT included support for several different platforms before the x86-based personal computer became dominant in the professional world. Windows NT 4.0 and its predecessors supported PowerPC, DEC Alpha and MIPS R4000. (Although some these platforms implement 64-bit computing, the operating system treated them as 32-bit.) However, Windows 2000, the successor of Windows NT 4.0, dropped support for all platforms except the third generation x86 (known as IA-32) or newer in 32-bit mode. The client line of Windows NT family still runs on IA-32, although the Windows Server line has ceased supporting this platform with the release of Windows Server 2008 R2.

With the introduction of the Intel Itanium architecture (IA-64), Microsoft released new versions of Windows to support it. Itanium versions of Windows XP and Windows Server 2003 were released at the same time as their mainstream x86 counterparts. Windows XP 64-Bit Edition, released in 2005, is the last Windows client operating systems to support Itanium. Windows Server line continues to support this platform until Windows Server 2012; Windows Server 2008 R2 is the last Windows operating system to support Itanium architecture.

On April 25, 2005, Microsoft released Windows XP Professional x64 Edition and Windows Server 2003 x64 Editions to support the x86-64 (or simply x64), the eighth generation of x86 architecture. Windows Vista was the first client version of Windows NT to be released simultaneously in IA-32 and x64 editions. x64 is still supported.

An edition of Windows 8 known as Windows RT was specifically created for computers with ARM architecture and while ARM is still used for Windows smartphones with Windows 10, tablets with Windows RT will not be updated.

Windows CE
Main articles: Windows CE and Windows Phone

The latest current version of Windows CE, Windows Embedded Compact 7, displaying a concept media player UI
Windows CE (officially known as Windows Embedded Compact), is an edition of Windows that runs on minimalistic computers, like satellite navigation systems and some mobile phones. Windows Embedded Compact is based on its own dedicated kernel, dubbed Windows CE kernel. Microsoft licenses Windows CE to OEMs and device makers. The OEMs and device makers can modify and create their own user interfaces and experiences, while Windows CE provides the technical foundation to do so.

Windows CE was used in the Dreamcast along with Sega's own proprietary OS for the console. Windows CE was the core from which Windows Mobile was derived. Its successor, Windows Phone 7, was based on components from both Windows CE 6.0 R3 and Windows CE 7.0. Windows Phone 8 however, is based on the same NT-kernel as Windows 8.

Windows Embedded Compact is not to be confused with Windows XP Embedded or Windows NT 4.0 Embedded, modular editions of Windows based on Windows NT kernel.

Xbox OS
Main articles: Xbox One system software and Xbox 360 system software
Xbox OS is an unofficial name given to the version of Windows that runs on the Xbox One.[44] It is a more specific implementation with an emphasis on virtualization (using Hyper-V) as it is three operating systems running at once, consisting of the core operating system, a second implemented for games and a more Windows-like environment for applications.[45] Microsoft updates Xbox One's OS every month, and these updates can be downloaded from the Xbox Live service to the Xbox and subsequently installed, or by using offline recovery images downloaded via a PC.[46] The Windows 10-based Core had replaced the Windows 8-based one in this update, and the new system is sometimes referred to as "Windows 10 on Xbox One" or "OneCore".[47][48] Xbox One's system also allows backward compatibility with Xbox 360,[49] and the Xbox 360's system is backwards compatible with the original Xbox.[50]

Version control system
In 2017 Microsoft announced that it would start using Git, an open source version control system created by Linus Torvalds. Microsoft has previously used a proprietary version control system called "Source Depot". Microsoft began to integrate Git into Team Foundation Server in 2013, but Windows continued to rely to Source Depot. However, this decision came with some complexity. The Windows codebase is not especially well suited to the decentralized nature of Linux development that Git was originally created to manage. Each Git repository contains a complete history of all the files, which proved unworkable for Windows developers because cloning the repository takes several hours. Microsoft has been working on a new project called the Git Virtual File system (GVFS) to address these challenges.[51]

Timeline of releases
Table of Windows versions [show]
Windows timeline: Bar chart [show]

The Windows family tree
Usage share and device sales
Main article: Usage share of operating systems
This box: view talk edit
Windows logo and wordmark - 2012 (dark blue).png
Market share overview
According to Net Applications[53][54] and StatCounter[55][56] data from December 2017

Desktop OS	Net Applications	StatCounter
Windows XP	5.18%	2.98%
Windows Vista	0.40%	0.58%
Windows 7	43.08%	34.63%
Windows 8	1.35%	2.36%
Windows 8.1	5.71%	7.57%
Windows 10	32.93%	34.47%
All listed versions	88.65%	82.68%
Mobile OS	Net Applications	StatCounter
Windows Phone 8	0.03%	0.64%
Windows Phone 8.1	0.02%
Windows 10 Mobile	0.10%
All listed versions	0.15%	0.64%
According to Net Applications, that tracks use based on web use, Windows is the most-used operating system family for personal computers as of July 2017 with close to 90% usage share.[57] When including both personal computers of all kinds, e.g. mobile devices, in July 2017, according to StatCounter, that also tracks use based on web use, Windows OSes accounted for 35.24% of usage share, compared to highest ranked Android at 41.24%, 13.22% for iOS, and 4.64% for macOS.[58][59] The below 50% usage share of Windows, also applies to developed countries, such as the US (where desktop, with Windows the largest part of, is down to 46.18%[60]), the UK and Ireland. These numbers are easiest (monthly numbers) to find that track real use, but they may not mirror installed base or sales numbers (in recent years) of devices. They are consistent with server numbers in next section.

In terms of the number of devices shipped with the operating system installed, on smartphones, Windows Phone was the third-most-shipped OS (2.6%) after Android (82.8%) and iOS (13.9%) in the second quarter of 2015 according to IDC.[61] Across both PCs and mobile devices, in 2014, Windows OSes were the second-most-shipped (333 million devices, or 14%) after Android (1.2 billion, 49%) and ahead of iOS and macOS combined (263 million, 11%).[62]

Use of the latest version Windows 10 now exceeds Windows 7 globally on weekends, and has already become more popular overall in some regions including in Europe and North America,[63][64] i.e. most developed countries, such as Japan, Australia and the US.[65]

Usage share on servers
Usage share of Windows on servers – those running a web servers that is (there are also other kinds of servers) – is at 33.6%.[66]

Security
Consumer versions of Windows were originally designed for ease-of-use on a single-user PC without a network connection, and did not have security features built in from the outset.[67] However, Windows NT and its successors are designed for security (including on a network) and multi-user PCs, but were not initially designed with Internet security in mind as much, since, when it was first developed in the early 1990s, Internet use was less prevalent.[68]

These design issues combined with programming errors (e.g. buffer overflows) and the popularity of Windows means that it is a frequent target of computer worm and virus writers. In June 2005, Bruce Schneier's Counterpane Internet Security reported that it had seen over 1,000 new viruses and worms in the previous six months.[69] In 2005, Kaspersky Lab found around 11,000 malicious programs—viruses, Trojans, back-doors, and exploits written for Windows.[70]

Microsoft releases security patches through its Windows Update service approximately once a month (usually the second Tuesday of the month), although critical updates are made available at shorter intervals when necessary.[71] In versions of Windows after and including Windows 2000 SP3 and Windows XP, updates can be automatically downloaded and installed if the user selects to do so. As a result, Service Pack 2 for Windows XP, as well as Service Pack 1 for Windows Server 2003, were installed by users more quickly than it otherwise might have been.[72]

While the Windows 9x series offered the option of having profiles for multiple users, they had no concept of access privileges, and did not allow concurrent access; and so were not true multi-user operating systems. In addition, they implemented only partial memory protection. They were accordingly widely criticised for lack of security.

The Windows NT series of operating systems, by contrast, are true multi-user, and implement absolute memory protection. However, a lot of the advantages of being a true multi-user operating system were nullified by the fact that, prior to Windows Vista, the first user account created during the setup process was an administrator account, which was also the default for new accounts. Though Windows XP did have limited accounts, the majority of home users did not change to an account type with fewer rights – partially due to the number of programs which unnecessarily required administrator rights – and so most home users ran as administrator all the time.

Windows Vista changes this[73] by introducing a privilege elevation system called User Account Control. When logging in as a standard user, a logon session is created and a token containing only the most basic privileges is assigned. In this way, the new logon session is incapable of making changes that would affect the entire system. When logging in as a user in the Administrators group, two separate tokens are assigned. The first token contains all privileges typically awarded to an administrator, and the second is a restricted token similar to what a standard user would receive. User applications, including the Windows shell, are then started with the restricted token, resulting in a reduced privilege environment even under an Administrator account. When an application requests higher privileges or "Run as administrator" is clicked, UAC will prompt for confirmation and, if consent is given (including administrator credentials if the account requesting the elevation is not a member of the administrators group), start the process using the unrestricted token.[74]

File permissions
All Windows versions from Windows NT 3 have been based on a file system permission system referred to as AGDLP (Accounts, Global, Local, Permissions) in which file permissions are applied to the file/folder in the form of a 'local group' which then has other 'global groups' as members. These global groups then hold other groups or users depending on different Windows versions used. This system varies from other vendor products such as Linux and NetWare due to the 'static' allocation of permission being applied directory to the file or folder. However using this process of AGLP/AGDLP/AGUDLP allows a small number of static permissions to be applied and allows for easy changes to the account groups without reapplying the file permissions on the files and folders.

Windows Defender
On January 6, 2005, Microsoft released a Beta version of Microsoft AntiSpyware, based upon the previously released Giant AntiSpyware. On February 14, 2006, Microsoft AntiSpyware became Windows Defender with the release of Beta 2. Windows Defender is a freeware program designed to protect against spyware and other unwanted software. Windows XP and Windows Server 2003 users who have genuine copies of Microsoft Windows can freely download the program from Microsoft's web site, and Windows Defender ships as part of Windows Vista and 7.[75] In Windows 8, Windows Defender and Microsoft Security Essentials have been combined into a single program, named Windows Defender. It is based on Microsoft Security Essentials, borrowing its features and user interface. Although it is enabled by default, it can be turned off to use another anti-virus solution.[76] Windows Malicious Software Removal Tool and the optional Microsoft Safety Scanner are two other free security products offered by Microsoft.

Third-party analysis
In an article based on a report by Symantec,[77] internetnews.com has described Microsoft Windows as having the "fewest number of patches and the shortest average patch development time of the five operating systems it monitored in the last six months of 2006."[78]

A study conducted by Kevin Mitnick and marketing communications firm Avantgarde in 2004, found that an unprotected and unpatched Windows XP system with Service Pack 1 lasted only four minutes on the Internet before it was compromised, and an unprotected and also unpatched Windows Server 2003 system was compromised after being connected to the internet for 8 hours.[79] The computer that was running Windows XP Service Pack 2 was not compromised. The AOL National Cyber Security Alliance Online Safety Study of October 2004, determined that 80% of Windows users were infected by at least one spyware/adware product.[citation needed] Much documentation is available describing how to increase the security of Microsoft Windows products. Typical suggestions include deploying Microsoft Windows behind a hardware or software firewall, running anti-virus and anti-spyware software, and installing patches as they become available through Windows Update.[80]

Alternative implementations
Owing to the operating system's popularity, a number of applications have been released that aim to provide compatibility with Windows applications, either as a compatibility layer for another operating system, or as a standalone system that can run software written for Windows out of the box. These include:

Wine – a free and open-source implementation of the Windows API, allowing one to run many Windows applications on x86-based platforms, including UNIX, Linux and macOS. Wine developers refer to it as a "compatibility layer"[81] and use Windows-style APIs to emulate Windows environment.
CrossOver – a Wine package with licensed fonts. Its developers are regular contributors to Wine, and focus on Wine running officially supported applications.
Cedega – a proprietary fork of Wine by TransGaming Technologies, designed specifically for running Microsoft Windows games on Linux. A version of Cedega known as Cider allows Windows games to run on macOS. Since Wine was licensed under the LGPL, Cedega has been unable to port the improvements made to Wine to their proprietary codebase. Cedega ceased its service in February 2011.
Darwine – a port of Wine for macOS and Darwin. Operates by running Wine on QEMU.
Linux Unified Kernel – a set of patches to the Linux kernel allowing many Windows executable files in Linux (using Wine DLLs); and some Windows drivers to be used.
ReactOS – an open-source OS intended to run the same software as Windows, originally designed to simulate Windows NT 4.0, now aiming at Windows 7 compatibility. It has been in the development stage since 1996.
Linspire – formerly LindowsOS, a commercial Linux distribution initially created with the goal of running major Windows software. Changed its name to Linspire after Microsoft v. Lindows. Discontinued in favor of Xandros Desktop, that was also later discontinued.
Freedows OS – an open-source attempt at creating a Windows clone for x86 platforms, intended to be released under the GNU General Public License. Started in 1996, by Reece K. Sellin, the project was never completed, getting only to the stage of design discussions which featured a number of novel concepts until it was suspended in 2002.[82][83][84]
See also
	Microsoft portal
Architecture of Windows NT
Wintel
De facto standard
Dominant design


Windows 7 (codenamed Vienna, formerly Blackcomb[7]) is a personal computer operating system developed by Microsoft. It is a part of the Windows NT family of operating systems. Windows 7 was released to manufacturing on July 22, 2009, and became generally available on October 22, 2009,[8] less than three years after the release of its predecessor, Windows Vista. Windows 7's server counterpart, Windows Server 2008 R2, was released at the same time.

Windows 7 was primarily intended to be an incremental upgrade to the operating system intending to address Windows Vista's poor critical reception while maintaining hardware and software compatibility. Windows 7 continued improvements on Windows Aero (the user interface introduced in Windows Vista) with the addition of a redesigned taskbar that allows applications to be "pinned" to it, and new window management features. Other new features were added to the operating system, including libraries, the new file sharing system HomeGroup, and support for multitouch input. A new "Action Center" interface was also added to provide an overview of system security and maintenance information, and tweaks were made to the User Account Control system to make it less intrusive. Windows 7 also shipped with updated versions of several stock applications, including Internet Explorer 8, Windows Media Player, and Windows Media Center.

In contrast to Windows Vista, Windows 7 was generally praised by critics, who considered the operating system to be a major improvement over its predecessor due to its increased performance, its more intuitive interface (with particular praise devoted to the new taskbar), fewer User Account Control popups, and other improvements made across the platform. Windows 7 was a major success for Microsoft; even prior to its official release, pre-order sales for 7 on the online retailer Amazon.com had surpassed previous records. In just six months, over 100 million copies had been sold worldwide, increasing to over 630 million licenses by July 2012, and a market share of 43.08% of "desktop operating systems" as of December 2017[9] according to Net Applications, making it the most widely used version of Windows (while Windows 10 is now more widely deployed in Europe and North America).

Contents  [hide]
1	Development history
2	Features
2.1	New and changed
2.2	Removed
3	Editions
3.1	Support lifecycle
4	System requirements
5	Extent of hardware support
5.1	Physical memory
5.2	Processor limits
6	Updates
6.1	Service Pack 1
6.2	Windows Management Framework 5.0
6.3	Platform Update
6.4	Disk Cleanup update
6.5	Convenience rollup
7	Reception
7.1	Critical reception
7.2	Sales
7.3	Antitrust concerns
8	References
9	Further reading
10	External links
Development history
Originally, a version of Windows codenamed Blackcomb was planned as the successor to Windows XP and Windows Server 2003 in 2000. Major features were planned for Blackcomb, including an emphasis on searching and querying data and an advanced storage system named WinFS to enable such scenarios. However, an interim, minor release, codenamed "Longhorn," was announced for 2003, delaying the development of Blackcomb.[10] By the middle of 2003, however, Longhorn had acquired some of the features originally intended for Blackcomb. After three major viruses: the Blaster, Nachi, and Sobig worms, exploited flaws in Windows operating systems within a short time period in August 2003,[11] Microsoft changed its development priorities, putting some of Longhorn's major development work on hold while developing new service packs for Windows XP and Windows Server 2003. Development of Longhorn (Windows Vista) was also restarted, and thus delayed, in August 2004. A number of features were cut from Longhorn.[12] Blackcomb was renamed Vienna in early 2006.[13]

When released, Windows Vista was criticized for its long development time, performance issues, its spotty compatibility with existing hardware and software on launch, changes affecting the compatibility of certain PC games, and unclear assurances by Microsoft that certain computers shipping with XP prior to launch would be "Vista Capable" (which led to a class action lawsuit), among other critiques. As such, adoption of Vista in comparison to XP remained somewhat low.[14][15][16] In July 2007, six months following the public release of Vista, it was reported that the next version of Windows would then be codenamed Windows 7, with plans for a final release within three years.[17][18] Bill Gates, in an interview with Newsweek, suggested that Windows 7 would be more "user-centric".[19] Gates later said that Windows 7 would also focus on performance improvements.[20] Steven Sinofsky later expanded on this point, explaining in the Engineering Windows 7 blog that the company was using a variety of new tracing tools to measure the performance of many areas of the operating system on an ongoing basis, to help locate inefficient code paths and to help prevent performance regressions.[21] Senior Vice President Bill Veghte stated that Windows Vista users migrating to Windows 7 would not find the kind of device compatibility issues they encountered migrating from Windows XP.[22] An estimated 1,000 developers worked on Windows 7. These were broadly divided into "core operating system" and "Windows client experience", in turn organized into 25 teams of around 40 developers on average.[23]

In October 2008, it was announced that Windows 7 would also be the official name of the operating system.[24][25] There has been some confusion over naming the product Windows 7,[26] while versioning it as 6.1 to indicate its similar build to Vista and increase compatibility with applications that only check major version numbers, similar to Windows 2000 and Windows XP both having 5.x version numbers.[27] The first external release to select Microsoft partners came in January 2008 with Milestone 1, build 6519.[28] Speaking about Windows 7 on October 16, 2008, Microsoft CEO Steve Ballmer confirmed compatibility between Windows Vista and Windows 7, indicating that Windows 7 would be a refined version of Windows Vista.[29]

At PDC 2008, Microsoft demonstrated Windows 7 with its reworked taskbar.[30] On December 27, 2008, the Windows 7 Beta was leaked onto the Internet via BitTorrent.[31] According to a performance test by ZDNet,[32] Windows 7 Beta beat both Windows XP and Vista in several key areas, including boot and shutdown time and working with files, such as loading documents. Other areas did not beat XP, including PC Pro benchmarks for typical office activities and video editing, which remain identical to Vista and slower than XP.[33] On January 7, 2009, the x64 version of the Windows 7 Beta (build 7000) was leaked onto the web, with some torrents being infected with a trojan.[34][35] At CES 2009, Microsoft CEO Steve Ballmer announced the Windows 7 Beta, build 7000, had been made available for download to MSDN and TechNet subscribers in the format of an ISO image.[36] The Beta was to be publicly released January 9, 2009, and Microsoft initially planned for the download to be made available to 2.5 million people on this date. However, access to the downloads was delayed because of high traffic.[37] The download limit was also extended, initially until January 24, then again to February 10. People who did not complete downloading the beta had two extra days to complete the download, and, after February 12, unfinished downloads became unable to complete. Users could still obtain product keys from Microsoft to activate their copies of Windows 7 Beta, which expired on August 1, 2009.

The release candidate, build 7100, became available for MSDN and TechNet subscribers and Connect Program participants on April 30, 2009. On May 5, 2009, it became available to the general public, although it had also been leaked onto the Internet via BitTorrent.[38] The release candidate was available in five languages and expired on June 1, 2010, with shutdowns every two hours starting March 1, 2010.[39] Microsoft stated that Windows 7 would be released to the general public on October 22, 2009. Microsoft released Windows 7 to MSDN and Technet subscribers on August 6, 2009, at 10:00 am PDT.[40] Microsoft announced that Windows 7, along with Windows Server 2008 R2, was released to manufacturing on July 22, 2009. Windows 7 RTM is build 7600.16385.090713-1255, which was compiled on July 13, 2009, and was declared the final RTM build after passing all Microsoft's tests internally.[41]

Features
New and changed
Main article: Features new to Windows 7

Windows 7 live thumbnails
Among Windows 7's new features are advances in touch and handwriting recognition,[42] support for virtual hard disks,[43] improved performance on multi-core processors,[44][45][46][47] improved boot performance, DirectAccess, and kernel improvements. Windows 7 adds support for systems using multiple heterogeneous graphics cards from different vendors (Heterogeneous Multi-adapter),[48] a new version of Windows Media Center,[49] a Gadget for Windows Media Center, improved media features, XPS Essentials Pack[50] and Windows PowerShell[51] being included, and a redesigned Calculator with multiline capabilities including Programmer and Statistics modes along with unit conversion for length, weight, temperature, and several others.[52] Many new items have been added to the Control Panel, including ClearType Text Tuner[53] Display Color Calibration Wizard,[54] Gadgets, Recovery, Troubleshooting, Workspaces Center, Location and Other Sensors, Credential Manager, Biometric Devices, System Icons, and Display.[55] Windows Security Center has been renamed to Windows Action Center (Windows Health Center and Windows Solution Center in earlier builds), which encompasses both security and maintenance of the computer. ReadyBoost on 32-bit editions now supports up to 256 gigabytes of extra allocation. Windows 7 also supports images in RAW image format through the addition of Windows Imaging Component-enabled image decoders, which enables raw image thumbnails, previewing and metadata display in Windows Explorer, plus full-size viewing and slideshows in Windows Photo Viewer and Windows Media Center.[56] Windows 7 also has a native TFTP client with the ability to transfer files to or from a TFTP server.[57]


The default taskbar of Windows 7.
The taskbar has seen the biggest visual changes, where the old Quick Launch toolbar has been replaced with the ability to pin applications to taskbar. Buttons for pinned applications are integrated with the task buttons. These buttons also enable Jump Lists to allow easy access to common tasks.[58] The revamped taskbar also allows the reordering of taskbar buttons. To the far right of the system clock is a small rectangular button that serves as the Show desktop icon. By default, hovering over this button makes all visible windows transparent for a quick look at the desktop.[59] In touch-enabled displays such as touch screens, tablet PCs, etc., this button is slightly (8 pixels) wider in order to accommodate being pressed by a finger.[60] Clicking this button minimizes all windows, and clicking it a second time restores them.

Window management in Windows 7 has several new features: Snap maximizes a window when it is dragged to the top of the screen.[61] Dragging windows to the left or right edges of the screen allows users to snap software windows to either side of the screen, such that the windows take up half the screen. When a user moves windows that were snapped or maximized using Snap, the system restores their previous state. Snap functions can also be triggered with keyboard shortcuts. Shake hides all inactive windows when the active window's title bar is dragged back and forth rapidly (metaphorically shaken).


Action Center, which replaces Windows Security Center in Windows XP and Vista

When the Action Center flag is clicked on, it lists all security and maintenance issues in a small popup window
Windows 7 includes 13 additional sound schemes, titled Afternoon, Calligraphy, Characters, Cityscape, Delta, Festival, Garden, Heritage, Landscape, Quirky, Raga, Savanna, and Sonata.[62] Internet Spades, Internet Backgammon and Internet Checkers, which were removed from Windows Vista, were restored in Windows 7. Users are able to disable or customize many more Windows components than was possible in Windows Vista. New additions to this list of components include Internet Explorer 8, Windows Media Player 12, Windows Media Center, Windows Search, and Windows Gadget Platform.[63] A new version of Microsoft Virtual PC, newly renamed as Windows Virtual PC was made available for Windows 7 Professional, Enterprise, and Ultimate editions.[64] It allows multiple Windows environments, including Windows XP Mode, to run on the same machine. Windows XP Mode runs Windows XP in a virtual machine, and displays applications within separate windows on the Windows 7 desktop.[65] Furthermore, Windows 7 supports the mounting of a virtual hard disk (VHD) as a normal data storage, and the bootloader delivered with Windows 7 can boot the Windows system from a VHD; however, this ability is only available in the Enterprise and Ultimate editions.[66] The Remote Desktop Protocol (RDP) of Windows 7 is also enhanced to support real-time multimedia application including video playback and 3D games, thus allowing use of DirectX 10 in remote desktop environments.[67] The three application limit, previously present in the Windows Vista and Windows XP Starter Editions, has been removed from Windows 7.[68] All editions include some new and improved features, such as Windows Search, Security features, and some features new to Windows 7, that originated within Vista. Optional BitLocker Drive Encryption is included with Windows 7 Ultimate and Enterprise. Windows Defender is included; Microsoft Security Essentials antivirus software is a free download. All editions include Shadow Copy, which—every day or so—System Restore uses to take an automatic "previous version" snapshot of user files that have changed.[69] Backup and restore have also been improved,[70][71] and the Windows Recovery Environment—installed by default—replaces the optional Recovery Console of Windows XP.[72]

A new system known as "Libraries" was added for file management; users can aggregate files from multiple folders into a "Library". By default, libraries for categories such as Documents, Pictures, Music, and Video are created, consisting of the user's personal folder and the Public folder for each. The system is also used as part of a new home networking system known as HomeGroup; devices are added to the network with a password, and files and folders can be shared with all other devices in the HomeGroup, or with specific users. The default libraries, along with printers, are shared by default, but the personal folder is set to read-only access by other users, and the Public folder can be accessed by anyone.[73][74]

Windows 7 includes improved globalization support through a new Extended Linguistic Services API[75] to provide multilingual support (particularly in Ultimate and Enterprise editions). Microsoft has also implemented better support for solid-state drives,[76] including the new TRIM command, and Windows 7 is able to identify a solid-state drive uniquely. Native support for USB 3.0 is not included due to delays in the finalization of the standard.[77] At WinHEC 2008 Microsoft announced that color depths of 30-bit and 48-bit would be supported in Windows 7 along with the wide color gamut scRGB (which for HDMI 1.3 can be converted and output as xvYCC). The video modes supported in Windows 7 are 16-bit sRGB, 24-bit sRGB, 30-bit sRGB, 30-bit with extended color gamut sRGB, and 48-bit scRGB.[78][79]

For developers, Windows 7 includes a new networking API with support for building SOAP-based web services in native code (as opposed to .NET-based WCF web services),[80] new features to simplify development of installation packages and shorten application install times.[81] Windows 7, by default, generates fewer User Account Control (UAC) prompts because it allows digitally signed Windows components to gain elevated privileges without a prompt. Additionally, users can now adjust the level at which UAC operates using a sliding scale.[82]

Removed
Main article: List of features removed in Windows 7
Certain capabilities and programs that were a part of Windows Vista are no longer present or have been changed, resulting in the removal of certain functionalities; these include the classic Start Menu user interface, some taskbar features, Windows Explorer features, Windows Media Player features, Windows Ultimate Extras, Search button, and InkBall. Four applications bundled with Windows Vista — Windows Photo Gallery, Windows Movie Maker, Windows Calendar and Windows Mail — are not included with Windows 7 and were replaced by Windows Live-branded versions as part of the Windows Live Essentials suite.[83][84]

Editions
Main article: Windows 7 editions
Windows 7 is available in six different editions, of which the Home Premium, Professional, and Ultimate were available at retail in most countries, and as pre-loaded software on new computers. Home Premium and Professional were aimed at home users and small businesses respectively, while Ultimate was aimed at enthusiasts. Each edition of Windows 7 includes all of the capabilities and features of the edition below it, and adds additional features oriented towards their market segments; for example, Professional adds additional networking and security features such as Encrypting File System and the ability to join a domain. Ultimate contained a superset of the features from Home Premium and Professional, along with other advanced features oriented towards power users, such as BitLocker drive encryption; unlike Windows Vista, there were no "Ultimate Extras" add-ons created for Windows 7 Ultimate.[85][86][87] Retail copies were available in "upgrade" and higher-cost "full" version licenses; "upgrade" licenses require an existing version of Windows to install, while "full" licenses can be installed on computers with no existing operating system.[88]

The remaining three editions were not available at retail, of which two were available exclusively through OEM channels as pre-loaded software. The Starter edition is a stripped-down version of Windows 7 meant for low-cost devices such as netbooks. In comparison to Home Premium, Starter has reduced multimedia functionality, does not allow users to change their desktop wallpaper or theme, disables the "Aero Glass" theme, does not have support for multiple monitors, and can only address 2GB of RAM.[87][89] Home Basic was sold only in emerging markets, and was positioned in between Home Premium and Starter.[85][86] The highest edition, Enterprise, is functionally similar to Ultimate, but is only sold through volume licensing via Microsoft's Software Assurance program.[90][91][92]

All editions aside from Starter support both IA-32 and x86-64 architectures; Starter only supports 32-bit systems.[87] Retail copies of Windows 7 are distributed on two DVDs: one for the IA-32 version and the other for x86-64. OEM copies include one DVD, depending on the processor architecture licensed. The installation media for consumer versions of Windows 7 are identical; the product key and corresponding license determines the edition that is installed. The Windows Anytime Upgrade service can be used to purchase an upgrade that unlocks the functionality of a higher edition, such as going from Starter to Home Premium, and Home Premium to Ultimate.[85] Most copies of Windows 7 only contained one license; in certain markets, a "Family Pack" version of Windows 7 Home Premium was also released for a limited time, which allowed upgrades on up to three computers.[93] In certain regions, copies of Windows 7 were only sold in, and could only be activated in a designated region.[94]

Support lifecycle
Support for Windows 7 without Service Pack 1 ended on April 9, 2013, requiring users to update in order to continue receiving updates and support.[95] Microsoft ended the sale of new retail copies of Windows 7 in October 2014, and the sale of new OEM licenses for Windows 7 Home Basic, Home Premium, and Ultimate ended on October 31, 2014. Professional currently remains available to OEMs, primarily as part of downgrade rights for Windows 8 and 10 licenses. OEM sales of PCs with Windows 7 Professional preinstalled ended on October 31, 2016.[96] The sale of non-Professional OEM licences was stopped on October 31, 2014.[97] Mainstream support for 7 ended on January 13, 2015. Extended support will end on January 14, 2020.[98]

System requirements
Minimum hardware requirements for Windows 7[99]
Component	Operating system architecture
32-bit	64-bit
Processor	1 GHz IA-32 processor	1 GHz x86-64 processor
Memory (RAM)	1 GB	2 GB
Graphics card	DirectX 9 graphics processor with WDDM driver model 1.0
Free hard drive space	16 GB	20 GB
Optical drive	DVD-ROM drive[100] (Only to install from DVD-ROM media)
Additional requirements to use certain features:[99]

Windows XP Mode (Professional, Ultimate and Enterprise): Requires an additional 1 GB of RAM and additional 15 GB of available hard disk space. The requirement for a processor capable of hardware virtualization has been lifted.[101]
Windows Media Center (included in Home Premium, Professional, Ultimate and Enterprise), requires a TV tuner to receive and record TV.
Extent of hardware support
Physical memory
The maximum amount of RAM that Windows 7 supports varies depending on the product edition and on the processor architecture, as shown in the following table.[102]

Physical memory limits of Windows 7
Edition	Processor architecture
IA-32 (32-bit)	x64 (64-bit)
Ultimate	4 GB	192 GB
Enterprise
Professional
Home Premium	16 GB
Home Basic	8 GB
Starter	2 GB	N/A
Processor limits
Windows 7 Professional and up support up to 2 physical processors (CPU sockets),[103] whereas Windows 7 Starter, Home Basic, and Home Premium editions support only 1.[104] Physical processors with either multiple cores, or hyper-threading, or both, implement more than one logical processor per physical processor. The x86 editions of Windows 7 support up to 32 logical processors; x64 editions support up to 256 (4 x 64).[105]

In January 2016, Microsoft announced that it would no longer support Windows platforms older than Windows 10 on any future Intel-compatible processor lines, citing difficulties in reliably allowing the operating system to operate on newer hardware. Microsoft stated that effective July 17, 2017, devices with Intel Skylake CPUs were only to receive the "most critical" updates for Windows 7 and 8.1, and only if they have been judged not to affect the reliability of Windows 7 on older hardware.[98][106] For enterprise customers, Microsoft issued a list of Skylake-based devices "certified" for Windows 7 and 8.1 in addition to Windows 10, to assist them in migrating to newer hardware that can eventually be upgraded to 10 once they are ready to transition. Microsoft and their hardware partners provide special testing and support for these devices on 7 and 8.1 until the July 2017 date.[107]

On March 18, 2016, in response to criticism from enterprise customers, Microsoft delayed the end of support and non-critical updates for Skylake systems to July 17, 2018, but stated that they would also continue to receive security updates through the end of extended support.[108][109] In August 2016, citing a "strong partnership with our OEM partners and Intel", Microsoft retracted the decision and stated that it would continue to support Windows 7 and 8.1 on Skylake hardware through the end of their extended support lifecycle. However, the restrictions on newer CPU microarchitectures remain in force.[110][111]

In March 2017, a Microsoft knowledge base article was discovered which implies that devices using Intel Kaby Lake, AMD Bristol Ridge, or AMD Ryzen, would be blocked from using Windows Update entirely.[112][113] In addition, official Windows 7 device drivers are not available for the Kaby Lake and Ryzen platforms.[114][115]

Updates
Service Pack 1
Windows 7 Service Pack 1 (SP1) was announced on March 18, 2010. A beta was released on July 12, 2010.[116][117][118] The final version was released to the public on February 22, 2011.[119] At the time of release, it was not made mandatory. It was available via Windows Update, direct download, or by ordering the Windows 7 SP1 DVD.[120] The service pack is on a much smaller scale than those released for previous versions of Windows, particularly Windows Vista.[121]

Windows 7 Service Pack 1 adds support for Advanced Vector Extensions (AVX), a 256-bit instruction set extension for processors, and improves IKEv2 by adding additional identification fields such as E-mail ID to it. In addition, it adds support for Advanced Format 512e as well as additional Identity Federation Services.[122][123] Windows 7 Service Pack 1 also resolves a bug related to HDMI audio and another related to printing XPS documents.[122]

In Europe, the automatic nature of the BrowserChoice.eu feature was dropped in Windows 7 Service Pack 1 in February 2011 and remained absent for 14 months despite Microsoft reporting that it was still present, subsequently described by Microsoft as a "technical error". As a result, in March 2013 the European Commission fined Microsoft €561 million to deter companies from reneging on settlement promises.[124]

Windows Management Framework 5.0
Windows Management Framework 5.0 includes updates to Windows PowerShell, Windows PowerShell Desired State Configuration (DSC), Windows Remote Management (WinRM), Windows Management Instrumentation (WMI). It was released on February 24, 2016.[125]

Platform Update
Platform Update for Windows 7 SP1 and Windows Server 2008 R2 SP1 was released on February 26, 2013[126] after a pre-release version had been released on November 5, 2012.[127] It is also included with Internet Explorer 10 for Windows 7.[128]

It includes enhancements to Direct2D, DirectWrite, Direct3D, Windows Imaging Component (WIC), Windows Advanced Rasterization Platform (WARP), Windows Animation Manager (WAM), XPS Document API, H.264 Video Decoder and JPEG XR decoder.[126] However support for Direct3D 11.1 is limited as the update does not include DXGI/WDDM 1.2 from Windows 8, making unavailable many related APIs and significant features such as stereoscopic frame buffer, feature level 11_1 and optional features for levels 10_0, 10_1 and 11_0.[129]

Disk Cleanup update
In October 2013, a Disk Cleanup Wizard addon was released that lets users delete outdated Windows updates on Windows 7 SP1, thus reducing the size of the WinSxS directory. This update backports some features found in Windows 8.[130]

Convenience rollup
In May 2016, Microsoft released a "Convenience rollup update for Windows 7 SP1 and Windows Server 2008 R2 SP1", which contains all patches released between the release of SP1 and April 2016. The rollup is not available via Windows Update, and must be downloaded manually. This package can also be integrated into a Windows 7 installation image.[131]

Since October 2016, all security and reliability updates are cumulative. Downloading and installing updates that address individual problems is no longer possible, but the number of updates that must be downloaded to fully update the OS is significantly reduced.[132]

Reception
Critical reception
Windows 7 received critical acclaim, with critics noting the increased usability and functionality when compared with its predecessor, Windows Vista. CNET gave Windows 7 Home Premium a rating of 4.5 out of 5 stars,[133] stating that it "is more than what Vista should have been, [and] it's where Microsoft needed to go". PC Magazine rated it a 4 out of 5 saying that Windows 7 is a "big improvement" over Windows Vista, with fewer compatibility problems, a retooled taskbar, simpler home networking and faster start-up.[134] Maximum PC gave Windows 7 a rating of 9 out of 10 and called Windows 7 a "massive leap forward" in usability and security, and praised the new Taskbar as "worth the price of admission alone".[135] PC World called Windows 7 a "worthy successor" to Windows XP and said that speed benchmarks showed Windows 7 to be slightly faster than Windows Vista.[136] PC World also named Windows 7 one of the best products of the year.[137] In its review of Windows 7, Engadget said that Microsoft had taken a "strong step forward" with Windows 7 and reported that speed is one of Windows 7's major selling points – particularly for the netbook sets.[138] Laptop Magazine gave Windows 7 a rating of 4 out of 5 stars and said that Windows 7 makes computing more intuitive, offered better overall performance including a "modest to dramatic" increase in battery life on laptop computers.[139] TechRadar gave Windows 7 a rating of 5 out of 5 stars, concluding that "it combines the security and architectural improvements of Windows Vista with better performance than XP can deliver on today's hardware. No version of Windows is ever perfect, but Windows 7 really is the best release of Windows yet."[140] The New York Times,[141] USA Today,[142] The Wall Street Journal,[143] and The Telegraph[144] also gave Windows 7 favorable reviews.

Some Windows Vista Ultimate users have expressed concerns over Windows 7 pricing and upgrade options.[145][146] Windows Vista Ultimate users wanting to upgrade from Windows Vista to Windows 7 must either pay $219.99[147] to upgrade to Windows 7 Ultimate or perform a clean install, which requires them to reinstall all of their programs.[148]

The changes to User Account Control on Windows 7 were criticized for being potentially insecure, as an exploit was discovered allowing untrusted software to be launched with elevated privileges by exploiting a trusted component. Peter Bright of Ars Technica argued that "the way that the Windows 7 UAC 'improvements' have been made completely exempts Microsoft's developers from having to do that work themselves. With Windows 7, it's one rule for Redmond, another one for everyone else."[149] Microsoft's Windows kernel engineer Mark Russinovich acknowledged the problem, but noted that malware can also compromise a system when users agree to a prompt.[82][150]

Sales
In July 2009, in only eight hours, pre-orders of Windows 7 at amazon.co.uk surpassed the demand which Windows Vista had had in its first 17 weeks.[151] It became the highest-grossing pre-order in Amazon's history, surpassing sales of the previous record holder, the seventh Harry Potter book.[152] After 36 hours, 64-bit versions of Windows 7 Professional and Ultimate editions sold out in Japan.[153] Two weeks after its release its market share had surpassed that of Snow Leopard, released two months previously as the most recent update to Apple's Mac OS X operating system.[154][155] According to Net Applications, Windows 7 reached a 4% market share in less than three weeks; in comparison, it took Windows Vista seven months to reach the same mark.[156][157] As of February 2014, Windows 7 has a market share of 47.49% according to Net Applications; in comparison, Windows XP had a market share of 29.23%.[158]

On March 4, 2010, Microsoft announced that it had sold more than 90 million Windows 7 licenses.[159] By April 23, 2010, Windows 7 had sold more than 100 million copies in six months, which made it Microsoft's fastest-selling operating system.[160][161] As of June 23, 2010, Windows 7 has sold 150 million copies which made it the fastest selling operating system in history with seven copies sold every second.[161][162] Based on worldwide data taken during June 2010 from Windows Update 46% of Windows 7 PCs run the 64-bit edition of Windows 7.[163] According to Stephen Baker of the NPD Group during April 2010 in the United States 77% of PCs sold at retail were pre-installed with the 64-bit edition of Windows 7.[163][164] As of July 22, 2010, Windows 7 had sold 175 million copies.[165] On October 21, 2010, Microsoft announced that more than 240 million copies of Windows 7 had been sold.[166] Three months later, on January 27, 2011, Microsoft announced total sales of 300 million copies of Windows 7.[167] On July 12, 2011, the sales figure was refined to over 400 million end-user licenses and business installations.[168] As of July 9, 2012, over 630 million licenses have been sold; this number includes licenses sold to OEMs for new PCs.[169]

Antitrust concerns
As with other Microsoft operating systems, Windows 7 is being studied by United States federal regulators who oversee the company's operations following the 2001 United States v. Microsoft Corp. settlement. According to status reports filed, the three-member panel began assessing prototypes of the new operating system in February 2008. Michael Gartenberg, an analyst at Jupiter Research said that, "[Microsoft's] challenge for Windows 7 will be how can they continue to add features that consumers will want that also don't run afoul of regulators."[170]

In order to comply with European antitrust regulations, Microsoft proposed the use of a "ballot" screen containing download links to competing web browsers, thus removing the need for a version of Windows completely without Internet Explorer, as previously planned.[171] In response to criticism involving Windows 7 E and concerns from manufacturers about possible consumer confusion if a version of Windows 7 with Internet Explorer were shipped later after one without Internet Explorer, Microsoft announced that it would discard the separate version for Europe and ship the standard upgrade and full packages worldwide.[172]

As with the previous version of Windows, an N version, which does not come with Windows Media Player, has been released in Europe, but only for sale directly from Microsoft sales websites and selected others.[173]

Windows 10 is a personal computer operating system developed and released by Microsoft as part of the Windows NT family of operating systems. It was released on July 29, 2015.[9] It is the first version of Windows that receives ongoing feature updates. Devices in enterprise environments can receive these updates at a slower pace, or use long-term support milestones that only receive critical updates, such as security patches, over their ten-year lifespan of extended support.[10][11]

Windows 10 introduces what Microsoft described as "universal apps"; expanding on Metro-style apps, these apps can be designed to run across multiple Microsoft product families with nearly identical code‍—‌including PCs, tablets, smartphones, embedded systems, Xbox One, Surface Hub and Mixed Reality. The Windows user interface was revised to handle transitions between a mouse-oriented interface and a touchscreen-optimized interface based on available input devices‍—‌particularly on 2-in-1 PCs; both interfaces include an updated Start menu which incorporates elements of Windows 7's traditional Start menu with the tiles of Windows 8. The first release of Windows 10 also introduces a virtual desktop system, a window and desktop management feature called Task View, the Microsoft Edge web browser, support for fingerprint and face recognition login, new security features for enterprise environments, and DirectX 12 and WDDM 2.0 to improve the operating system's graphics capabilities for games.

Windows 10 received mostly positive reviews upon its original release in July 2015; critics praised Microsoft's decision to provide a desktop-oriented interface in line with previous versions of Windows, contrasting the tablet-oriented approach of 8, although Windows 10's touch-oriented user interface mode was panned for containing regressions upon the touch-oriented interface of Windows 8. Critics also praised the improvements to Windows 10's bundled software over Windows 8.1, Xbox Live integration, as well as the functionality and capabilities of Cortana personal assistant and the replacement of Internet Explorer with Microsoft Edge. However, media outlets have been critical of changes to operating system behaviors, including mandatory update installation, privacy concerns over data collection performed by the OS for Microsoft and its partners, and the adware-like tactics used to promote the operating system on its release.[12][13][14][15][16]

Microsoft aimed to have Windows 10 installed on at least one billion devices in the two to three years following its release.[10] Up to August 2016, Windows 10 usage was increasing, with it then plateauing,[17][18] while eventually in 2018, it got slightly more popular than Windows 7,[19][20] as measured by web traffic. As of November 2017, the operating system is running on more than 600 million devices[21] and has an estimated usage share of 32% on traditional PCs[22][23] and 15% across all platforms (PC, mobile, tablet, and console).[24][25] Windows 10 has already become more popular overall on desktops in some regions including in Europe and North America,[26][27] i.e. most developed countries, such as first in Iceland and later, Japan, Australia and the US.[28]

Contents  [hide]
1	Development
1.1	Announcement
1.2	Release
2	Features
2.1	User interface and desktop
2.2	System security
2.3	Command line
2.4	Storage requirements
2.5	Online services and functionality
2.6	Multimedia and gaming
3	Removed features
3.1	Features removed on version 1607
3.2	Features removed on version 1703 and 1709
4	Editions and pricing
4.1	Preview releases
4.2	Public release
5	Updates and support
5.1	Feature updates
5.2	Features in development
6	System requirements
7	Reception
7.1	Market share and sales
7.2	Update system changes
7.3	Distribution practices
7.4	Privacy and data collection
8	See also
9	References
10	External links
Development[edit]
At the Microsoft Worldwide Partner Conference in 2011, Andrew Lees, the chief of Microsoft's mobile technologies, said that the company intended to have a single software ecosystem for PCs, phones, tablets, and other devices. "We won’t have an ecosystem for PCs, and one for phones, and one for tablets‍—‌they'll all come together."[29][30]

In December 2013, technology writer Mary Jo Foley reported that Microsoft was working on an update to Windows 8 codenamed "Threshold", after a planet in Microsoft's Halo video game franchise.[31] Similarly to "Blue" (which became Windows 8.1),[32] Foley called Threshold a "wave of operating systems" across multiple Microsoft platforms and services, scheduled for the second quarter of 2015. Foley reported that among the goals for Threshold was to create a unified application platform and development toolkit for Windows, Windows Phone and Xbox One (which all use a similar Windows NT kernel).[31][33]

In April 2014, at the Build Conference, Microsoft's Terry Myerson unveiled an updated version of Windows 8.1 that added the ability to run Windows Store apps inside desktop windows and a more traditional Start menu in place of the Start screen seen in Windows 8. The new Start menu takes after Windows 7's design by using only a portion of the screen and including a Windows 7-style application listing in the first column. The second column displays Windows 8-style app tiles. Myerson said that these changes would occur in a future update, but did not elaborate.[34][35] Microsoft also unveiled the concept of a "universal Windows app", allowing Windows Store apps created for Windows 8.1 to be ported to Windows Phone 8.1 and Xbox One while sharing a common codebase, with an interface designed for different device form factors, and allowing user data and licenses for an app to be shared between multiple platforms. Windows Phone 8.1 would share nearly 90% of the common Windows Runtime APIs with Windows 8.1 on PCs.[34][36][37][38]

Screenshots of a Windows build which purported to be Threshold were leaked in July 2014, showing the previously presented Start menu and windowed Windows Store apps[39] followed by a further screenshot in September 2014 of a build identifying itself as "Windows Technical Preview", numbered 9834, showing a new virtual desktop system, a notification center, and a new File Explorer icon.[40]

Announcement[edit]
Threshold was officially unveiled during a media event on September 30, 2014, under the name Windows 10; Myerson said that Windows 10 would be Microsoft's "most comprehensive platform ever", providing a single, unified platform for desktop computers, laptops, tablets, smartphones, and all-in-one devices.[41][42][43] He emphasized that Windows 10 would take steps towards restoring user interface mechanics from Windows 7 to improve the experience for users on non-touch devices, noting criticism of Windows 8's touch-oriented interface by keyboard and mouse users.[44][45] Despite these concessions, Myerson noted that the touch-oriented interface would evolve as well on 10.[46]

In regards to Microsoft naming the new operating system Windows 10 instead of Windows 9, Terry Myerson said that "based on the product that's coming, and just how different our approach will be overall, it wouldn't be right to call it Windows 9."[47] He also joked that they could not call it "Windows One" (alluding to several recent Microsoft products with a similar brand, such as OneDrive, OneNote, and Xbox One) because Windows 1.0 already existed.[48] Tony Prophet, Microsoft Vice President of Windows Marketing, said at a San Francisco conference in October 2014 that Windows 9 "came and went", and that Windows 10 is not "an incremental step from Windows 8.1," but "a material step. We're trying to create one platform, one eco-system that unites as many of the devices [sic] from the small embedded Internet of Things, through tablets, through phones, through PCs and, ultimately, into the Xbox."[49]

Further details surrounding Windows 10's consumer-oriented features were presented during another media event held on January 21, 2015, entitled "Windows 10: The Next Chapter". The keynote featured the unveiling of Cortana integration within the operating system, new Xbox-oriented features, Windows 10 Mobile, an updated Office Mobile suite, Surface Hub‍—‌a large-screened Windows 10 device for enterprise collaboration based upon Perceptive Pixel technology,[50] along with HoloLens‑augmented reality eyewear and an associated platform for building apps that can render holograms through HoloLens.[51]

Additional developer-oriented details surrounding the "Universal Windows Platform" concept were revealed and discussed during Microsoft's developers' conference Build. Among them were the unveiling of "Islandwood", which provides a middleware toolchain for compiling Objective-C based software (particularly, iOS software) to run as universal apps on Windows 10 and Windows 10 Mobile. A port of Candy Crush Saga made using the toolkit, which shared much of its code with the iOS version, was demonstrated, alongside the announcement that the King-developed game would be bundled with Windows 10 at launch.[52][53][54][55]

Release[edit]
On June 1, 2015, Microsoft announced that Windows 10 would be released on July 29, 2015.[9] Microsoft began an advertising campaign centering on Windows 10, "Upgrade Your World", on July 20, 2015 with the premiere of television commercials in Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States. The commercials focused on the tagline "A more human way to do", emphasizing new features and technologies supported by Windows 10 that sought to provide a more "personal" experience to users.[56][57] The campaign culminated with launch events in thirteen cities on July 29, which celebrated "the unprecedented role our biggest fans played in the development of Windows 10".[58]

Features[edit]
Main article: Features new to Windows 10
Windows 10 harmonizes the user experience and functionality between different classes of device, and addresses shortcomings in the user interface that were introduced in Windows 8.[44][45][59] Windows 10 Mobile, the successor to Windows Phone 8.1, shares some user interface elements and apps with its PC counterpart.[60]

The Windows Runtime app ecosystem was revised into the Universal Windows Platform (UWP).[36][61][62] These universal apps are made to run across multiple platforms and device classes, including smartphones, tablets, Xbox One consoles, and other compatible Windows 10 devices. Windows apps share code across platforms, have responsive designs that adapt to the needs of the device and available inputs, can synchronize data between Windows 10 devices (including notifications, credentials, and allowing cross-platform multiplayer for games), and are distributed through a unified Windows Store. Developers can allow "cross-buys", where purchased licenses for an app apply to all of the user's compatible devices, rather than only the one they purchased on (e.g., a user purchasing an app on PC is also entitled to use the smartphone version at no extra cost).[37][63][64]

On Windows 10, Windows Store serves as a unified storefront for apps, music, films, TV series and ebooks.[65] Windows 10 also allows web apps and desktop software (using either Win32 or .NET Framework) to be packaged for distribution on the Windows Store. Desktop software distributed through Windows Store is packaged using the App-V system to allow sandboxing.[66][67]

User interface and desktop[edit]

The "Task View" display is a new feature to Windows 10, allowing the use of multiple workspaces.
A new iteration of the Start menu is used on the Windows 10 desktop, with a list of places and other options on the left side, and tiles representing applications on the right. The menu can be resized, and expanded into a full-screen display, which is the default option in Tablet mode.[44][59][68] A new virtual desktop system was added. A feature known as Task View displays all open windows and allows users to switch between them, or switch between multiple workspaces.[44][59] Windows Store apps, which previously could be used only in full screen mode, can now be used in self-contained windows similarly to other programs.[44][59] Program windows can now be snapped to quadrants of the screen by dragging them to the corner. When a window is snapped to one side of the screen, Task View appears and the user is prompted to choose a second window to fill the unused side of the screen (called "Snap Assist").[59] Windows' system icons were also changed.[68]

Charms have been removed; their functionality in Windows Store apps is accessed from an App commands menu on their title bar.[44][59] In its place is Action Center, which displays notifications and settings toggles. It is accessed by clicking an icon in the notification area, or dragging from the right of the screen. Notifications can be synced between multiple devices.[60][68] The Settings app (formerly PC Settings) was refreshed and now includes more options that were previously exclusive to the desktop Control Panel.[69][70]

Windows 10 is designed to adapt its user interface based on the type of device being used and available input methods. It offers two separate user interface modes: a user interface optimized for mouse and keyboard, and a "Tablet mode" designed for touchscreens. Users can toggle between these two modes at any time, and Windows can prompt or automatically switch when certain events occur, such as disabling Tablet mode on a tablet if a keyboard or mouse is plugged in, or when a 2-in-1 PC is switched to its laptop state. In Tablet mode, programs default to a maximized view, and the taskbar contains a back button and hides buttons for opened or pinned programs; Task View is used instead to switch between programs. The full screen Start menu is used in this mode, similarly to Windows 8, but scrolls vertically instead of horizontally.[45][71][72][73]

System security[edit]

Windows Hello unlock prompt on a Surface Pro 4 while using Enpass (a password manager)
Windows 10 incorporates multi-factor authentication technology based upon standards developed by the FIDO Alliance.[74] The operating system includes improved support for biometric authentication through the Windows Hello platform. Devices with supported cameras (requiring infrared illumination, such as Intel RealSense) allow users to log in with iris or face recognition, similarly to Kinect. Devices with supported readers allow users to log in through fingerprint recognition. Credentials are stored locally and protected using asymmetric encryption.[75]

When Windows 10 was first introduced, multi-factor authentication was provided by two components: Windows Hello and Passport (not to be confused with the Passport platform of 1998). Later, Passport was merged into Windows Hello.[76][75]

The enterprise version of Windows 10 offers additional security features; administrators can set up policies for the automatic encryption of sensitive data, selectively block applications from accessing encrypted data, and enable Device Guard‍—‌a system which allows administrators to enforce a high security environment by blocking the execution of software that is not digitally signed by a trusted vendor or Microsoft. Device Guard is designed to protect against zero-day exploits, and runs inside a hypervisor so that its operation remains separated from the operating system itself.[74][77]

Command line[edit]
Win32 console windows can now be resized without any restrictions, can be made to cover the full screen by pressing Alt+↵ Enter, and can use standard keyboard shortcuts, such as those for cut, copy, and paste. Other features such as word wrap and transparency were also added. These functions can be disabled to revert to the legacy console, if needed.[78]

The Anniversary Update adds Windows Subsystem for Linux, which allows the installation of a user space environment from a supported Linux distribution that runs natively on Windows. The subsystem translates Linux system calls that the Linux system uses to those of the Windows NT kernel. The environment can execute the Bash shell and 64-bit command line programs. Windows applications cannot be executed from the Linux environment, and vice versa. Linux distributions for Windows Subsystem for Linux are obtained through Windows Store. The feature initially supported an Ubuntu-based environment; Microsoft announced in May 2017 that it would add Fedora and OpenSUSE environment options as well.[79][80][81][82][83][84][85]

Storage requirements[edit]
To reduce the storage footprint of the operating system, Windows 10 automatically compresses system files. The system can reduce the storage footprint of Windows by approximately 1.5 GB for 32-bit systems and 2.6 GB for 64-bit systems. The level of compression used is dependent on a performance assessment performed during installations or by OEMs, which tests how much compression can be used without harming operating system performance. Furthermore, the Refresh and Reset functions use runtime system files instead, making a separate recovery partition redundant, allowing patches and updates to remain installed following the operation, and further reducing the amount of space required for Windows 10 by up to 12 GB. These functions replace the WIMBoot mode introduced on Windows 8.1 Update, which allowed OEMs to configure low-capacity devices with flash-based storage to use Windows system files out of the compressed WIM image typically used for installation and recovery.[86][87][88] Windows 10 also includes a function in its Settings app that allows users to view a breakdown of how their device's storage capacity is being used by different types of files, and determine whether certain types of files are saved to internal storage or an SD card by default.[89]

Online services and functionality[edit]
Windows 10 introduces a new default web browser, Microsoft Edge.[90] It features a new standards-compliant rendering engine forked from Trident, annotation tools, and offers integration with other Microsoft platforms present within Windows 10.[91][92] Internet Explorer 11 is maintained on Windows 10 for compatibility purposes, but is deprecated in favor of Edge and will no longer be actively developed.[93][94]

Windows 10 incorporates Microsoft's intelligent personal assistant, Cortana, which was first introduced with Windows Phone 8.1 in 2014. Cortana replaced Windows' embedded search feature, supporting both text and voice input. Many of its features are a direct carryover from Windows Phone, including integration with Bing, setting reminders, a Notebook feature for managing personal information, as well as searching for files, playing music, launching applications and setting reminders or sending emails.[95][96] Cortana is implemented as a universal search box located alongside the Start and Task View buttons, which can be hidden or condensed to a single button.[68]

Microsoft Family Safety is replaced by Microsoft Family, a parental controls system that applies across Windows platforms and Microsoft online services. Users can create a designated family, and monitor and restrict the actions of users designated as children, such as access to websites, enforcing age ratings on Windows Store purchases, and other restrictions. The service can also send weekly e-mail reports to parents detailing a child's computer usage. Unlike previous versions of Windows, child accounts in a family must be associated with a Microsoft account‍—‌which allows these settings to apply across all Windows 10 devices that a particular child is using.[97][98]

Windows 10 also offers the Wi-Fi Sense feature originating from Windows Phone 8.1; users can optionally have their device automatically connect to suggested open hotspots, and share their home network's password with contacts (either via Skype, People, or Facebook) so they may automatically connect to the network on a Windows 10 device without needing to manually enter its password. Credentials are stored in an encrypted form on Microsoft servers, and sent to the devices of the selected contacts. Passwords are not viewable by the guest user, and the guest user is not allowed to access other computers or devices on the network. Wi-Fi Sense is not usable on 802.1X-encrypted networks. Adding "_optout" at the end of the SSID will also block the corresponding network from being used for this feature.[99]

Universal calling and messaging apps for Windows 10 are built in as of the November 2015 update: Messaging, Skype Video, and Phone. These offer built-in alternatives to the Skype download and sync with Windows 10 Mobile.[100][101]

Multimedia and gaming[edit]
See also: List of Xbox Live Games on Windows 10

The dedicated Xbox app on Windows 10, on the "Avatar Store" page
Windows 10 provides heavier integration with the Xbox ecosystem. Xbox SmartGlass is succeeded by the Xbox app, which allows users to browse their game library (including both PC and Xbox console games), and Game DVR is also available using a keyboard shortcut, allowing users to save the last 30 seconds of gameplay as a video that can be shared to Xbox Live, OneDrive, or elsewhere.[102][103] Windows 10 also allows users to control and play games from an Xbox One console over a local network.[104] The Xbox Live SDK allows application developers to incorporate Xbox Live functionality into their apps, and future wireless Xbox One accessories, such as controllers, are supported on Windows with an adapter.[105] Microsoft also intends to allow cross-buys and save synchronization between Xbox One and Windows 10 versions of games; Microsoft Studios games such as ReCore and Quantum Break are intended as being exclusive to Windows 10 and Xbox One.[106]

Candy Crush Saga and Microsoft Solitaire Collection are also automatically installed upon installation of Windows 10.[107][108]

Windows 10 adds native game recording and screenshot capture ability using the newly introduced game bar. Users can also have the OS continuously record gameplay in the background, which, then, allows the user to save the last few, user configurable, moments of gameplay to the hard disk.[109]

Windows 10 adds FLAC and HEVC codecs and support for the Matroska media container, allowing these formats to be opened in Windows Media Player and other applications.[110][111][112]

DirectX 12[edit]
Windows 10 includes DirectX 12, alongside WDDM 2.0.[113][114] Unveiled March 2014 at GDC, DirectX 12 aims to provide "console-level efficiency" with "closer to the metal" access to hardware resources, and reduced CPU and graphics driver overhead.[115][116] Most of the performance improvements are achieved through low-level programming, which allow developers to use resources more efficiently and reduce single-threaded CPU bottlenecking caused by abstraction through higher level APIs.[117][118] DirectX 12 will also feature support for vendor agnostic multi-GPU setups.[119] WDDM 2.0 introduces a new virtual memory management and allocation system to reduce workload on the kernel-mode driver.[113][120]

Removed features[edit]
Windows Media Center was discontinued, and is uninstalled when upgrading from a previous version of Windows.[121][122] Upgraded Windows installations with Media Center will receive the paid app Windows DVD Player free of charge for a limited, but unspecified, time.[123] Microsoft had previously relegated Media Center and integrated DVD playback support to a paid add-on beginning on Windows 8 due to the cost of licensing the required DVD playback related patents, and the increasing number of PC devices that have no optical drives.[124]

The OneDrive built-in sync client, which was introduced in Windows 8.1, no longer supports offline placeholders for online-only files in Windows 10.[125][126] This functionality was re-added in Windows 10 version 1709, under the name "OneDrive Files On-Demand".[127]

Users are no longer able to synchronize Start menu layouts across all devices associated with a Microsoft account. A Microsoft developer justified the change by explaining that a user may have different applications they want to emphasize on each device that they use, rather than use the same configuration across each device. The ability to automatically install a Windows Store app across all devices associated with an account was also removed.[128]

Web browsers can no longer set themselves as a user's default without further intervention; changing the default web browser must be performed manually by the user from Settings' "Default apps" page, ostensibly to prevent browser hijacking.[129]

Parental controls no longer support browsers other than Internet Explorer and Edge, and the ability to control browsing by a whitelist was removed.[130] Also removed were the ability to control local accounts, and the ability to scan a machine for applications to allow and block.[citation needed]

The Food & Drink, Health & Fitness, and Travel apps have been discontinued.[131]

Drivers for floppy drives are no longer integrated and must be downloaded separately.[122][132]

While all Windows 10 editions include fonts that provide broad language support, some fonts for Middle Eastern and East Asian languages (Arabic, Chinese, Hindi, Japanese, Korean, etc.) are no longer included with the standard installation to reduce storage space used, but are available without charge as optional font packages. When software invokes text in languages other than those for which the system is configured and does not use the Windows font fallback mechanisms designed always to display legible glyphs, Windows displays unsupported characters as a default "not defined" glyph, a square or rectangular box, or a box with a dot, question mark or "x" inside.[133]

Windows Defender could be integrated into File Explorer's context menu in Windows 8.x, but Microsoft initially removed integration from Windows 10, restoring it in Windows 10 build 10571 in response to user feedback.[134]

User control over Windows Updates was removed (except in enterprise versions). In earlier versions users could opt for updates to be installed automatically, or to be notified so they could update as and when they wished, or not to be notified; and they could choose which updates to install, using information about the updates. Windows 10 Pro and Enterprise users may be configured by an administrator to defer updates, but only for a limited time.[135] Under the Windows end-user license agreement, users consent to the automatic installation of all updates, features and drivers provided by the service, and to the automatic removal or changes to features being modified is not required; it is implicit "without any additional notice".[136][137][138]

Features removed on version 1607[edit]
Cortana can no longer be fully hidden, as it was made the default search experience in the Windows shell for all users (on previous revisions, a generic search experience without any Cortana branding and functionality is used if it is disabled). As with previous builds, users must still opt-in and grant permission for the software to perform data collection and tracking in order to fully enable Cortana's personalized features. If this functionality is not enabled, Cortana operates in a feature-limited mode with basic web and device search functionality, nearly identical to the non-Cortana search experience on previous builds.[139][140]

In April 2016, Microsoft announced that it will no longer allow Cortana web searches to be executed through any other web browser and search engine combination but Microsoft Edge and Bing, intentionally disregarding user settings. Microsoft stated that circumvention of these settings (which could be accomplished with third-party software) results in a "compromised experience that is less reliable and predictable", and that only Microsoft Edge supports direct integration with Cortana within the browser itself.[141][142]

Certain features related to embedded advertising in the operating system can no longer be disabled on non-enterprise versions of Windows 10 using management settings such as Group Policy,[143] including disabling Windows Store and Universal Windows Platform apps, "Microsoft consumer experiences" (which pushes tiles to the Start menu advertising Windows Store apps promoted by Microsoft, typically following a new installation of Windows 10), Windows Tips, turning off the lock screen (which can optionally display ads as part of "Spotlight" tips), or enforcing a specific lock screen background. Critics argued that this change was meant to discourage Windows 10 Pro from being used in business environments, since Microsoft was making it less attractive by reducing the amount of control administrators have over their devices' environment without using an enterprise version of Windows 10.[143]

The ability to share Wi-Fi credentials with other contacts via Wi-Fi Sense was removed; Wi-Fi passwords can still be synced between devices tied to the same Microsoft account.[144]

The ability to change the Exit Windows, Windows Logoff and Windows Logon sounds was hidden in Version 1607, although these features can be enabled by going to the Windows Registry and under the EventLabels folder and setting the value to 0.[145]

Features removed on version 1703 and 1709[edit]
Windows Update will no longer postpone the download of certain critical updates if the device is connected to a network that was designated by the user as being "metered". Although meant to prevent the updates from utilizing data allotments, this behavior had been used as a workaround by users to defy the requirement for all updates to be automatically downloaded.[146]

Devices containing an Intel Atom "Clover Trail" system-on-chip are incompatible with Version 1703, and cannot be upgraded to this version of Windows 10.[147]

Server Message Block version 1 (SMB1) is disabled by default on version 1709. The Home and Pro editions only disable the SMB1 server, but retain the SMB1 client, so they can connect to SMB1 network shares. The Enterprise and Education editions disable the SMB1 entirely. This version of the 30-year-old protocol gained notoriety in the WannaCry ransomware attack, although Microsoft had been discouraging its use even before.[148]

The Interactive Service Detection service, introduced in Windows Vista to combat shatter attacks, is removed in 1703.[149] Syskey was removed in 1709, with Microsoft recommending the use of Bitlocker instead.[150]

Editions and pricing[edit]
Main article: Windows 10 editions
Windows 10 is available in five main editions for personal computer devices, of which the Home and Pro versions are sold at retail in most countries, and as pre-loaded software on new computers. Home is aimed at home users, while Pro is aimed at small businesses and enthusiasts. Each edition of Windows 10 includes all of the capabilities and features of the edition below it, and add additional features oriented towards their market segments; for example, Pro adds additional networking and security features such as BitLocker, Device Guard, Windows Update for Business, and the ability to join a domain. The remaining editions, Enterprise and Education, contain additional features aimed towards business environments, and are only available through volume licensing.[151][152]

As part of Microsoft's unification strategies, Windows products that are based on Windows 10's common platform but meant for specialized platforms are marketed as editions of the operating system, rather than as separate product lines. An updated version of Microsoft's Windows Phone operating system for smartphones, and also tablets, was branded as Windows 10 Mobile.[153] Editions of Enterprise and Mobile will also be produced for embedded systems, along with Windows 10 IoT Core, which is designed specifically for use in small footprint, low-cost devices and Internet of Things (IoT) scenarios and is similar to Windows Embedded.[151][152]

On May 2, 2017, Microsoft unveiled Windows 10 S (referred to in leaks as Windows 10 Cloud), a feature-limited version of Windows 10 designed primarily for devices in the education market, such as the Surface Laptop that Microsoft also unveiled at this time, and for low-end (educational) devices to compete with Chromebooks. The OS restricts software installation to applications obtained from Windows Store; the device may be upgraded to Windows 10 Pro for a fee to enable unrestricted software installation. Windows 10 S also contains a faster initial setup and login process, and allows devices to be provisioned using a USB drive with the Windows Intune for Education platform. All Windows 10 S devices will include a free one-year subscription to Minecraft: Education Edition.[154][155][156][157][158]

Preview releases[edit]
See also: Windows Insider
A public beta program for Windows 10 known as the Windows Insider Program (previously Windows Technical Preview) began with the first publicly available preview release on October 1, 2014. Insider preview builds are aimed towards enthusiasts and enterprise users for the testing and evaluation of updates and new features.[159] Users of the Windows Insider program receive occasional updates to newer preview builds of the operating system and will continue to be able to evaluate preview releases after general availability (GA) in July 2015‍—‌this is in contrast to previous Windows beta programs, where public preview builds were released less frequently and only during the months preceding GA.[44][46][160][161][162] Windows Insider builds continued being released after the release to manufacturing (RTM) of Windows 10.[163][164]

Public release[edit]
Microsoft promoted that Windows 10 would become generally available (GA) on July 29, 2015. In comparison to previous Windows releases, which had a longer turnover between the release to manufacturing (RTM) and general release to allow for testing by vendors (and in some cases, the development of "upgrade kits" to prepare systems for installation of the new version), an HP Inc. executive explained that because it knew Microsoft targeted the operating system for a release in 2015, the company was able to optimize its then-current and upcoming products for Windows 10 in advance of its release, negating the need for such a milestone.[165][better source needed]

The general availability build of Windows 10, numbered 10240, was first released on July 15, 2015 to Windows Insider channels for pre-launch testing prior to its formal release.[166][167] Although a Microsoft official said that there would be no specific RTM build of Windows 10, 10240 was described as an RTM build by media outlets because it was released to all Windows Insider members at once (rather than to users on the "Fast ring" first), it no longer carried pre-release branding and desktop watermark text, and because its build number had mathematical connections to the number 10 in reference to the operating system's naming.[168][169][170][171][172][173] The Enterprise edition was released to volume licensing on August 1, 2015.[174]

Users are able to in-place upgrade through the "Get Windows 10" application (GWX) and Windows Update,[175] or the "Media Creation Tool", which is functionally identical to the Windows 8 online installer, and can also be used to generate an ISO image or USB install media.[176] In-place upgrades are supported from most editions of Windows 7 with Service Pack 1 and Windows 8.1 with Update 1, while users with Windows 8 must first upgrade to Windows 8.1. Changing between architectures (e.g., upgrading from 32-bit edition to a 64-bit editions) via in-place upgrades is not supported; a clean install is required.[177][178] In-place upgrades may be rolled back to the device's previous version of Windows, provided that 30 days have not passed since installation, and backup files were not removed using Disk Cleanup.[179]

Windows 10 was available in 190 countries and 111 languages upon its launch, and as part of efforts to "re-engage" with users in China, Microsoft also announced that it would partner with Qihoo and Tencent to help promote and distribute Windows 10 in China, and that Chinese PC maker Lenovo would provide assistance at its service centers and retail outlets for helping users upgrade to Windows 10.[180][181][182] At retail, Windows 10 is priced similarly to editions of Windows 8.1, with U.S. prices set at $119 and $199 for Windows 10 Home and Pro respectively. A Windows 10 Pro Pack license allows upgrades from Windows 10 Home to Windows 10 Pro.[183][184] Retail copies ship on USB flash drive media or DVD-ROM media.[185] New devices shipping with Windows 10 were also released during the operating system's launch window.[186]

Windows RT devices cannot be upgraded to Windows 10.[178][187]

Free upgrade offer[edit]
Main article: Windows 10 editions § Free upgrade
During its first year of availability (ended on July 29, 2016),[188] upgrade licenses for Windows 10 could be obtained at no charge for devices with a genuine license for an eligible edition of Windows 7 or 8.1.[184][189][190] This offer did not apply to Enterprise editions, as customers under an active Software Assurance (SA) contract with upgrade rights are entitled to obtain Windows 10 Enterprise under their existing terms. All users running non-genuine copies of Windows, and those without an existing Windows 7 or 8 license, were ineligible for this promotion; although upgrades from a non-genuine version were possible, they result in a non-genuine copy of 10.[163][180][190][191][192]

On the general availability build of Windows 10, to activate and generate the "digital entitlement" for Windows 10, the operating system must have first been installed as an in-place upgrade. Once installed, the operating system can be reinstalled on that particular system via normal means without a product key, and the system's license will automatically be detected via online activation.[177][193][194] As of the November 2015 build, an existing Windows 7 or Windows 8.1 product key can be entered during installation to activate the free license, without the need to upgrade first to "activate" the hardware with Microsoft's activation servers.[195] The Windows Insider Preview version of Windows 10 automatically updated itself to the generally released version as part of the version progression, and continues to be updated to new beta builds, as it had throughout the testing process. Microsoft explicitly stated that Windows Insider was not a valid upgrade path for those running a version of Windows that is ineligible for the upgrade offer; although, if it was not installed with a license carried over from an in-place upgrade to 10 Insider Preview from Windows 7 or 8, the Insider Preview does remain activated as long as the user does not exit the Windows Insider program.[163][164]

The offer was promoted and delivered via the "Get Windows 10" application ("GWX"), which was automatically installed via Windows Update ahead of Windows 10's release, and activated on systems deemed eligible for the upgrade offer. Via a notification area icon, users could access an application that advertised Windows 10 and the free upgrade offer, check device compatibility, and "reserve" an automatic download of the operating system upon its release.[196][197] On July 28, a pre-download process began in which Windows 10 installation files were downloaded to some computers that had reserved it. Microsoft said that those who reserved Windows 10 would be able to install it through GWX in a phased rollout process. The operating system could alternatively be downloaded at any time using a separate "Media Creation Tool" setup program (similar to Windows 8's setup program), that allows for the creation of DVD or USB installation media.[176][186][198][199]

Microsoft announced in May 2016 that the free upgrade offer would be extended to users of assistive technologies; however, Microsoft did not implement any means of certifying eligibility for this offer, which some outlets thereby promoted as being a loophole to fraudulently obtain a free Windows 10 upgrade. Microsoft said that the loophole is not intended to be used in this manner.[200][201][202] In November 2017, Microsoft stated that this program would end December 31, 2017.[203]

Licensing[edit]
During upgrades, Windows 10 licenses are not tied directly to a product key. Instead, the license status of the system's current installation of Windows is migrated, and a "Digital entitlement" is generated during the activation process, which is bound to the hardware information collected during the process. If Windows 10 is reinstalled cleanly and there have not been any significant hardware changes since installation (such as a motherboard change), the online activation process will automatically recognize the system's digital entitlement if no product key is entered during installations. However, unique product keys are still distributed within retail copies of Windows 10. As with previous non-volume-licensed versions of Windows, significant hardware changes will invalidate the digital entitlement, and require Windows to be re-activated.[177][193]

Updates and support[edit]
Overview
Version	Code name	Marketing name	Release date	Support until[204]	Latest build
SAC[205]	LTSC	PC	Mobile
1507	Threshold 1	N/A	July 29, 2015	May 9, 2017	October 14, 2025	10240	N/A
1511	Threshold 2	November Update	November 10, 2015	October 10, 2017	April 2018[206]	10586	10586
1607	Redstone 1	Anniversary Update	August 2, 2016	March 2018	October 13, 2026	14393	14393
1703	Redstone 2	Creators Update	April 5, 2017	September 2018	N/A	15063	15063
1709	Redstone 3	Fall Creators Update	October 17, 2017	March 2019	TBA	16299	15254
1803	Redstone 4	TBA	Early 2018	TBA	TBA	17083	N/A
Legend:Old versionOlder version, still supportedLatest versionLatest preview version
Unlike previous versions of Windows, Windows Update does not allow the selective installation of updates, and all updates (including patches, feature updates, and driver software) are downloaded and installed automatically. Users can only choose whether their system will reboot automatically to install updates when the system is inactive, or be notified to schedule a reboot.[207][208] If a wireless network is designated as "Metered"—a function which automatically reduces the operating system's background network activity to conserve limits on internet usage, most updates are not downloaded until the device is connected to a non-metered network. Redstone 2 allows wired (Ethernet) networks to be designated as metered, but Windows may still download certain updates while connected to a metered network.[146][209] Updates can cause compatibility or other problems; a Microsoft troubleshooter program allows bad updates to be uninstalled.[210][211]

Windows Update can also use a peer to peer system for distributing updates; by default, users' bandwidth is used to distribute previously downloaded updates to other users, in combination with Microsoft servers. Users can instead choose to only use peer-to-peer updates within their local area network.[212]

The original RTM release of Windows 10 ("Windows 10, released in July 2015") receives mainstream support for five years after its original release, followed by five years of extended support, but this is subject to conditions. Microsoft's support lifecycle policy for the operating system notes that "Updates are cumulative, with each update built upon all of the updates that preceded it", that "a device needs to install the latest update to remain supported", and that a device's ability to receive future updates will depend on hardware compatibility, driver availability, and whether the device is within the OEM's "support period"‍—‌a new aspect not accounted for in lifecycle policies for previous versions.[213][190][214][215] This policy was first invoked in 2017 to block Intel Clover Trail devices from receiving the Creators Update, as Microsoft asserts that future updates "require additional hardware support to provide the best possible experience", and that Intel no longer provided support or drivers for the platform. Microsoft stated that these devices would no longer receive feature updates, but would still receive security updates through January 2023.[216]

Feature updates[edit]
Main article: Windows 10 version history
Windows 10 is often described by Microsoft as a being as a "service", as it receives regular feature updates that contain new features and other changes.[190][217][218][219] In April 2017, Microsoft stated that in the future, these updates would be released twice a year every March and September.[220]

The pace at which feature updates are received by devices is dependent on which release channel is used. The default branch for all users of Windows 10 Home and Pro is "Semi-Annual Channel (Targeted)" (formerly "Current Branch", or "CB"),[219] which receives stable builds after they are publicly released by Microsoft. Each build of Windows 10 is supported for 18 months after its original release.[219] In enterprise environments, Microsoft officially intends that this branch be used for "targeted" deployments of newly-released stable versions, so that they can be evaluated and tested on a limited number of devices before a wider deployment. Once a stable build is certified by Microsoft and its partners as being suitable for broad deployment, the build is then released on the "Semi-Annual Channel" (formerly "Current Branch for Business", or "CBB"), which is supported by the Pro and Enterprise editions of Windows 10.[219][208][221] Semi-Annual Channel receives stable builds on a four-month delay from their release on the Targeted channel,[219] Administrators can also use the "Windows Update for Business" system, as well as existing tools such as WSUS and System Center Configuration Manager, to organize structured deployments of feature updates across their networks.[219][208]

The Windows Insider branches receive unstable builds as they are released; it is divided into two channels, "Fast" (which receives new builds immediately after their release), and "Slow" (whose releases are slightly delayed from their "Fast" release).[219]

Enterprise licensees may use the Windows 10 Enterprise LTSB edition, where "LTSB" stands for "long-term servicing branch".[219][221] LTSB milestones of Windows 10 are designed for long-term deployments in specialized environments (such as automated teller machines and medical equipment), and only receive quality of life updates (i.e. security patches). Each LTSB milestone is given a full, 10-year support lifecycle. Due to Microsoft's intended use cases for LTSB builds, certain features, including most Cortana functionality, Microsoft Store, and bundled apps, are excluded from LTSB.[219][190][222][223] Microsoft director Stella Chernyak explained that "we have businesses [that] may have mission-critical environments where we respect the fact they want to test and stabilize the environment for a long time."[224] Two LTSB builds have been released, correlating with the 1507 and 1607 versions of Windows 10; Microsoft stated in 2017 that the next LTSB build will be released in 2019.[225]

In July 2017, Microsoft announced changes in the terminology for Windows branches, as part of its effort to unify the update cadence with that of Office 365 ProPlus and Windows Server 2016.[226][219] The branch system now defines two paces of upgrade deployment in enterprise environments, "targeted" initial deployment of a new version on selected systems immediately after its stable release for final testing, and "broad" deployment afterwards. Hence, "Current Branch" is now known as "Semi-Annual Channel (Targeted)", and "Current Branch for Business" for broad deployment is now referred to as "Semi-Annual Channel".[227][219]

Windows 10 support and update branches[190][228][229][230]
Update branch	Windows Insider Preview Branch
(WIPB)
Beta software	Semi-Annual Channel (Targeted)
(formerly CB)
"Consumer grade"	Semi-Annual Channel
(formerly CBB)
"Business ready"	Long-term Servicing branch
(LTSB)
"Mission critical"
Edition	Home
Pro
Education
Enterprise	Enterprise LTSB
Critical updates
Security patches and stability updates	Continuous as made available
(choice of slow, fast, or release preview ring)	Automatic and mandatory[231]	Automatic	User can defer updates indefinitely
Feature upgrades
Non-critical functionality and feature updates	Automatic or defer	Only through LTSB in-place upgrades
Feature upgrades cadence	Continuous as released	Progressively after WIPB evaluation	~4 months after CB evaluation or
defer for an additional ~8 months	LTSB releases are stable 'snapshots' of CBB
Upgrade support	Continuous updating, features silently come and sometimes go with new builds	Continuous updating or in-place upgrade to supported LTSB builds	In-place upgrade support for the three most recent LTSB builds
Update support	10 years (or until future builds require hardware support the old device doesn't have or ~4 months after a missed cumulative update made into CBB.)[213]	10 years (or ~8 months from deferring build upgrade or until future builds require hardware support the old device doesn't have.)	5 years mainstream + 5 years extended
Update methods	Windows Update	Windows Update
Windows Update for Business
Windows Server Update Services	Windows Update for Business
Windows Server Update Services
Version 1511 (November Update)[edit]
The second stable build of Windows 10, build 10586 (also known as the November Update or version 1511, and codenamed "Threshold 2" (TH2)), began to be distributed via Windows Update on November 12, 2015. It contains various improvements to the operating system, its user interface, bundled services, as well as the introduction of Skype-based universal messaging apps, and the Windows Store for Business and Windows Update for Business features.[232][233][234][235]

On November 21, 2015, 10586 was temporarily pulled from public distribution.[236][237] The upgrade was re-instated on November 24, 2015, with Microsoft stating that the removal was due to a bug that caused privacy and data collection settings to be reset to defaults when installing the upgrade.[238]

Version 1607 (Anniversary Update)[edit]
The third stable build of Windows 10 (officially branded as the Anniversary Update or version 1607, and codenamed "Redstone 1" (RS1)), was released on August 2, 2016, a little over one year after the first stable release of Windows 10.[239][240][241][242] The "Redstone" branch is expected to comprise two major stable builds. While both were originally to be released during 2016, it was later reported that the second had been delayed into 2017 so that it would be released in concert with that year's wave of Microsoft first-party devices.[243][244][240]

The Redstone branch introduces new features such as the Windows Ink platform, which eases the ability to add stylus input support to Universal Windows Platform apps and provides a new "Ink Workspace" area with links to pen-oriented apps and features,[245][240] enhancements to Cortana's proactive functionality,[246] a dark user interface theme mode, a new version of Skype designed to work with the Universal Windows Platform, improvements to Universal Windows Platform intended for video games,[239] and offline scanning using Windows Defender.[247] Redstone also supports Windows Subsystem for Linux, a new component that provides an environment for running Linux-compatible binary software in an Ubuntu-based user mode environment.[248]

On new installations of Windows 10 on systems with secure boot enabled, all kernel mode drivers issued after July 29, 2015, must be digitally signed with an Extended Validation Certificate issued by Microsoft.[249]

This version is the basis for "LTSB 2016", the first upgrade to the LTSB since Windows 10's release. The first LTSB release, based on RTM (version 1507), has been retroactively named "LTSB 2015".

Version 1703 (Creators Update)[edit]
Microsoft announced the fourth stable build of Windows 10 on October 26, 2016.[250] Officially branded as the Creators Update or version 1703,[251] and codenamed "Redstone 2" (RS2), it was released on April 11, 2017 for general availability,[252][253] and on April 5, 2017 for manual installation via Windows 10 Upgrade Assistant and Media Creation Tool tools.[254] This update primarily focuses on content creation, productivity, and gaming features—with a particular focus on virtual and augmented reality (including HoloLens and virtual reality headsets) and on aiding the generation of three-dimensional content.

It supports a new virtual reality workspace designed for use with headsets; Microsoft announced that several OEMs planned to release VR headsets designed for use with the Creators Update.[253][252][255] Controls for the Xbox app's Game Bar and Game DVR feature have moved to the Settings app, while a new "Game Mode" option allows resources to be prioritized towards games.[256] Integration with Microsoft acquisition Mixer (formerly Beam)[257] was added for live streaming.[256] The themes manager moved to Settings app, and custom accent colors are now possible.[256] The new app Paint 3D allows users to produce artwork using 3D models; the app is designed to make 3D creation more accessible to mainstream users.[258]

The presentation of Windows 10's privacy settings has changed to have more detailed explanations of the types of data that the operating system may collect. Additionally, the "enhanced" level of telemetry collection has been removed.[256] Windows Update notifications may now be "snoozed" for a period of time, the "active hours" during which Windows will not try to install updates may now extend up to 18 hours in length, and updates may be paused for up to seven days.[256] Windows Defender was also updated with a newuser experience, Windows Defender Security Center.[256] "Dynamic Lock" allows a device to automatically lock if it is outside of the proximity of a designated Bluetooth device, such as a smartphone.[259] A "Night Light" feature was implemented which allows the user to change the color temperature of the display to the red part of the spectrum (to help the user sleep better). The feature acts like f.lux and the Night Shift feature available on iOS and macOS.[260]

Version 1709 (Fall Creators Update)[edit]
The fifth stable release of Windows 10, officially branded as the Fall Creators Update or version 1709[261][262] and codenamed "Redstone 3" (RS3), was released on October 17, 2017.[263]

It introduces a new feature known as "My People", where shortcuts to "important" contacts can be displayed on the taskbar. Notifications involving these contacts appear above their respective pictures, and users can communicate with the contact via either Skype, e-mail, or text messaging (integrating with Android and Windows 10 Mobile devices). Support for additional services, including Xbox, Skype for Business, and third-party integration, are to be added in the future. Files can also be dragged directly to the contact's picture to share them.[264] My People was originally announced for Creators Update, but was ultimately held over to the next release,[265][266] and made its first public appearance in Build 16184 in late April 2017.[262] A new "Files-on-Demand" feature for OneDrive serves as a partial replacement for the previous "placeholders" function.[267]

It also introduces a new security feature known as "controlled folder access", which allows application access to defined folders to be restricted to specified software. This feature is designed mainly to defend against file-encrypting ransomware.[268]

Features in development[edit]
In May 2017, Microsoft unveiled Fluent Design System (previously codenamed "Project Neon"), a revamp of Microsoft Design Language 2 that will include guidelines for the designs and interactions used within software designed for all Windows 10 devices and platforms. The new design language will include more prominent use of motion, depth, and translucency effects. Microsoft stated that the implementation of this design language would be performed over time, and it had already started to implement elements of it in Creators Update and Fall Creators Update.[269]

At Build 2017, Microsoft announced several key features that were to launch in Fall Creators Update; "Timeline" and "Pick up where you left off" will allow users to view a list of recently-used applications and files sourced from multiple devices in an on-screen timeline, and synchronize opened content in apps (such as Office documents) so a user can continue working on it from a different device (similar to macOS's "Handoff"). These functions are enabled via the Microsoft Graph platform, and will support Android and iOS devices.[270][271] Microsoft also plans to add a "Cloud clipboard" synchronized between devices.[267] Timeline has since been delayed to the next release.[272]

In November 2017, Microsoft detailed a new UI feature known as "Sets", which initially allows supported UWP programs to be hosted within Microsoft Edge tabs. Microsoft states that this feature is designed to "organize and resume multi-faceted tasks", and will eventually be extended to non-UWP software.[273][274]

On December 7, 2016, Microsoft announced that as part of a partnership with Qualcomm, it planned to introduce support for running Win32 software on ARM architecture with a 32-bit x86 processor emulator, in 2017. Terry Myerson stated that this move would enable the production of Qualcomm Snapdragon-based Windows devices with cellular connectivity and improved power efficiency over Intel-compatible devices, and still capable of running the majority of existing Windows software (unlike the previous Windows RT, which was restricted to Windows Store apps). Microsoft is initially targeting this project towards laptops.[275] Microsoft launched the branding Always Connected PCs in December 2017 to market Windows 10 devices with cellular connectivity, which included two ARM-based 2-in-1 laptops from Asus and HP featuring the Snapdragon 835 system-on-chip, and the announcement of a partnership between AMD and Qualcomm to integrate its Snapdragon X16 gigabit LTE modem with AMD's Ryzen Mobile platform.[276][277]

System requirements[edit]
Hardware requirements for Windows 10[189]
Component	Minimum	Recommended
Processor	1 GHz clock rate
IA-32 or x86-64 architecture with support for PAE, NX and SSE2
x86-64 CPUs must also support CMPXCHG16B, PrefetchW and LAHF/SAHF instructions.[278][279]
Memory (RAM)	IA-32 edition: 1 GB
x86-64 edition: 2 GB	4 GB
Graphics card	DirectX 9 graphics device
WDDM 1.0 or higher driver	WDDM 1.3 or higher driver
Display	800×600 pixels	N/A
Input device	Keyboard and mouse	Multi-touch display
Storage space	IA-32 edition: 16 GB
x86-64 edition: 20 GB	N/A
Additional requirements for optional functionality[189]
Feature	Requirements
Biometric authentication	Fingerprint reader
BitLocker	Trusted Platform Module (TPM) 1.2 or 2.0, a dedicated USB flash drive, or a password
Device encryption	Trusted Platform Module (TPM) 2.0 and InstantGo
Hyper-V	Second Level Address Translation (SLAT)
Miracast	Wi-Fi adapter that supports Wi-Fi Direct
Secure attention	Hardware equivalent of Ctrl+Alt+Delete or ⊞ Win+Power key sequence
Secure Boot	UEFI v2.3.1 Errata B with Microsoft Windows Certification Authority in its database
Speech recognition	Microphone
Windows Hello	Illuminated infrared camera
The basic hardware requirements to install Windows 10 are the same as for Windows 8.1 and Windows 8, and only slightly higher than Windows 7. The 64-bit versions require a CPU that supports certain instructions.[280] Devices with low storage capacity must provide a USB flash drive or SD card with sufficient storage for temporary files during upgrades.[281]

Some pre-built devices may be described as "certified" by Microsoft. Certified tablets must include Power, Volume up, and Volume down keys; ⊞ Win and Rotation lock keys are no longer required.[282]

As with Windows 8, all certified devices must ship with UEFI Secure Boot enabled by default. Unlike Windows 8, OEMs are no longer required to make Secure Boot settings user-configurable, meaning that devices may optionally be locked to run only Microsoft-signed operating systems.[283] A supported infrared-illuminated camera is required for Windows Hello face authentication.[189] Device Guard requires a UEFI system with no third-party certificates loaded, and CPU virtualization extensions (including SLAT and IOMMU) enabled in firmware.

Beginning with Intel Kaby Lake and AMD Bristol Ridge, Windows 10 is the only version of Windows that Microsoft will officially support on newer CPU microarchitectures.[284][285] Terry Myerson stated that Microsoft did not want to make further investments in optimizing older versions of Windows and associated software for newer generations of processors.[286][287] These policies were criticized by the media, who especially noted that Microsoft was refusing to support newer hardware (particularly Intel's Skylake CPUs, which was also originally targeted by the new policy with a premature end of support that was ultimately retracted)[288][289] on Windows 8.1, a version of Windows that is still in mainstream support until January 2018.[290][291] In addition, an enthusiast-created modification was released that disabled the check and allowed Windows 8.1 and earlier to continue to work on the platform.[292]

Windows 10 Creators Update does not support Intel Clover Trail system-on-chips, per Microsoft's stated policy of only providing updates for devices during their OEM support period.[216][147]

Reception[edit]
Main article: Criticism of Windows 10
Critics characterized the initial release of Windows 10 in July 2015 as being rushed, citing the incomplete state of some of the operating system's bundled software (such as the Edge web browser), as well as the stability of the operating system itself on launch.[293][294][295] However, TechRadar felt that Windows 10 would be "the new Windows 7", citing the operating system's more familiar user interface, improvements to bundled apps, performance improvements, a "rock solid" search system, and the Settings app being more full-featured than its equivalents on 8 and 8.1. The Microsoft Edge web browser was praised for its performance, albeit not being in a feature-complete state on-launch. While considering them a "great idea in principle", concerns were shown for Microsoft's focus on the universal app ecosystem, noting that "It's by no means certain that developers are going to flock to Windows 10 from iOS and Android simply because they can convert their apps easily. It may well become a no-brainer for them, but at the moment a conscious decision is still required."[294]

Engadget was similarly positive, noting that the upgrade process was painless, and that Windows 10's user interface had balanced aspects of Windows 8 with those of previous versions with a more mature aesthetic. Cortana's always-on voice detection was considered to be its "true strength", also citing its query capabilities and personalization features, but noting that it was not as pre-emptive as Google Now. Windows 10's stock applications were praised for being improved over their Windows 8 counterparts, and for supporting windowed modes. The Xbox app was also praised for its Xbox One streaming functionality, although recommending its use over a wired network due to inconsistent quality over Wi-Fi. In conclusion, it was argued that "Windows 10 delivers the most refined desktop experience ever from Microsoft, and yet it's so much more than that. It's also a decent tablet OS, and it's ready for a world filled with hybrid devices. And, barring another baffling screwup, it looks like a significant step forward for mobile. Heck, it makes the Xbox One a more useful machine."[296]

Ars Technica panned the new Tablet mode interface for removing the charms and app switching, making the Start button harder to use by requiring users to reach for the button on the bottom-left rather than at the center of the screen when swiping with a thumb, and for making application switching less instantaneous through the use of Task View. Microsoft Edge was praised for being "tremendously promising", and "a much better browser than Internet Explorer ever was", but criticized it for its lack of functionality on-launch. In conclusion, contrasting Windows 8 as being a "reliable" platform albeit consisting of unfinished concepts, Windows 10 was considered "the best Windows yet" and was praised for having a better overall concept in its ability to be "comfortable and effective" across a wide array of form factors, but that it was buggier than previous versions of Windows were on-launch.[293] ExtremeTech felt that Windows 10 restricted the choices of users, citing its more opaque setting menus, forcing users to give up bandwidth for the peer-to-peer distribution of updates, and for taking away user control of specific functions, such as updates, explaining that "it feels, once again, as if Microsoft has taken the seed of a good idea, like providing users with security updates automatically, and shoved the throttle to maximum."[297]

Critics have noted that Windows 10 heavily emphasizes freemium services, and contains various advertising facilities. Some outlets have considered these to be a hidden "cost" of the free upgrade offer.[298][299][300] Examples of these have included microtransactions in bundled games such as Microsoft Solitaire Collection,[301][298][302][303] default settings that display promotions of "suggested" apps in Start menu and "tips" on the lock screen that may contain advertising,[299][300] ads displayed in File Explorer for Office 365 subscriptions on Creators' Update,[300] and various advertising notifications promoting Microsoft Edge when it is not set as default web browser.[304]

Market share and sales[edit]
See also: Usage share of operating systems § Crossover to smartphones having majority share
Windows PC market share statistics
Windows 7
 
41.89%
Windows 10
 
41.69%
Windows 8.1
 
9.16%
Windows XP
 
3.6%
Windows 8
 
2.86%
Windows Vista
 
0.7%
Other
 
0.1%
Desktop operating system market share according to StatCounter for December 2017.[305]
Twenty-four hours after it was released, Microsoft announced that more than 14 million devices were running Windows 10.[306] On August 26, Microsoft said more than 75 million devices were running Windows 10, in 192 countries, and on more than 90,000 unique PC or tablet models.[307] According to Terry Myerson, there were more than 110 million devices running Windows 10 as of October 6, 2015.[308] On January 4, 2016, Microsoft reported that Windows 10 had been activated on more than 200 million devices since the operating system's launch in July 2015.[309][310]

In the monthly hardware survey conducted by the video game distribution platform Steam, approximately 34.05% of all devices surveyed ran a version of Windows 10 (either 32-bit or 64-bit architecture) as of January 2016, in comparison to 42.08% using Windows 7. On 64-bit architecture only, Windows 10 was used by 32.77%, behind 34.31% on Windows 7 64-bit.[311]

According to StatCounter, Windows 10 overtook Windows 8.1 in December 2015.[312][313]

According to StatCounter market share statistics (based on web use proxy), Iceland was the first country where Windows 10 was ranked first (not only on the desktop, it also holds across all platforms),[314] with several bigger European countries following (a British Crown dependency Isle of Man got there first ahead of any country, late in 2015[315]) and others such as Canada (most popular on desktops; iOS still more popular, ranked first). For one week late in November 2016, Windows 10 overtook first rank from Windows 7 in the United States, before losing it again;[316] it becomes more popular every weekend.

At the end of June 2016, Windows 10 had been installed on nearly 350 million devices.[317] By the end of September, this number had become 400 million.[318]

By February 2017, Windows 10 was losing market share to Windows 7.[319]

In the middle of January 2018, Windows 10 got slightly ahead of Windows 7 reaching its all-time high for "Desktop Windows Version Market Share".[19]

Update system changes[edit]
Windows 10 Home is permanently set to download all updates automatically, including cumulative updates, security patches, and drivers, and users cannot individually select updates to install or not.[122] Microsoft offers a diagnostic tool that can be used to hide updates and prevent them from being reinstalled, but only after they had been already installed, then uninstalled without rebooting the system.[320][321] Tom Warren of The Verge felt that, given web browsers such as Google Chrome had already adopted such an automatic update system, such a requirement would help to keep all Windows 10 devices secure, and felt that "if you're used to family members calling you for technical support because they've failed to upgrade to the latest Windows service pack or some malware disabled Windows Update then those days will hopefully be over."[322]

Concerns were raised that due to these changes, users would be unable to skip the automatic installation of updates that are faulty or cause issues with certain system configurations‍—‌although build upgrades will also be subject to public beta testing via Windows Insider program.[320][322] There were also concerns that the forced installation of driver updates through Windows Update, where they were previously designated as "optional", could cause conflicts with drivers that were installed independently of Windows Update. An example of such a situation occurred just prior to the general release of the operating system, when an Nvidia graphics card driver that was automatically pushed to Windows 10 users via Windows Update caused issues that prevented the use of certain functions, or prevented their system from booting at all.[320]

Criticism was also directed towards Microsoft's decision to no longer provide specific details on the contents of cumulative updates for Windows 10.[138] On February 9, 2016, Microsoft retracted this decision and began to provide release notes for cumulative updates on the Windows website.[323]

Some users reported that during the installation of the November upgrade, some applications (particularly utility programs such as CPU-Z and Speccy) were automatically uninstalled during the upgrade process, and some default programs were reset to Microsoft-specified defaults (such as Photos app, and Microsoft Edge for PDF viewing), both without warning.[324][325]

Further issues were discovered upon the launch of the Anniversary Update ("Redstone"), including a bug that caused some devices to freeze (but addressed by cumulative update KB3176938, released on August 31, 2016),[326][327] and that fundamental changes to how Windows handles webcams had caused many to stop working.[328]

On June 2017, a Redstone 3 Insider build (which is known as rs_IoT on Mobile) was accidentally released to Insider and as well on non-Insider users in all Windows 10 PCs and Mobile, but the update was retracted earlier and Microsoft apologized and released a note in their Windows Insider Program blog in how to prevent the said Insider build to be installed in their device.[329] According to Dona Sarkar, "because an inadvertent deployment to the engineering system that controls which builds/which rings to push out to insiders." [330]

Distribution practices[edit]
Microsoft was criticized for the tactics that it used to promote its free upgrade campaign for Windows 10, including adware-like behaviours,[331] using deceptive user interfaces to coax users into installing the operating system,[12][13][14][15] downloading installation files without user consent,[332][331] and making it difficult for users to suppress the advertising and notifications if they did not wish to upgrade to 10.[332][331][333] The upgrade offer was marketed and initiated using the "Get Windows 10" (GWX) application, which was first downloaded and installed via Windows Update in March 2015.[12][15] Registry keys and group policies could be used to partially disable the GWX mechanism, but the installation of patches to the GWX software via Windows Update could reset these keys back to defaults, and thus reactivate the software.[332][331][333][334][333][13] Third-party programs were also created to assist users in applying measures to disable GWX.[335]

In September 2015, it was reported that Microsoft was triggering automatic downloads of the Windows 10 installation files on all compatible Windows 7 or 8.1 computers configured to automatically download and install updates, regardless of whether or not they had specifically requested the upgrade. Microsoft officially confirmed the change, claiming it was "an industry practice that reduces time for installation and ensures device readiness." This move was criticized by users who have data caps or devices with low storage capacity, as resources were consumed by the automatic downloads of up to 6 GB of data. Other critics argued that Microsoft should not have triggered any downloading of Windows 10 installation files without user consent.[331][332][336]

In October 2015, Windows 10 began to appear as an "Optional" update in the Windows Update interface, but pre-selected for installation on some systems. A Microsoft spokesperson said that this was a mistake, and that the download would no longer be pre-selected by default.[14] However, on October 29, 2015, Microsoft announced that it planned to classify Windows 10 as a "recommended" update in the Windows Update interface some time in 2016, which will cause an automatic download of installation files and a one-time prompt with a choice to install to appear.[337][338] In December 2015, it was reported that a new advertising dialog had begun to appear, only containing "Upgrade now" and "Upgrade tonight" buttons, and no obvious method to decline installation besides the close button.[13]

In March 2016, some users also alleged that their Windows 7 and 8.1 devices had automatically begun upgrading to 10 without their consent.[339] In June 2016, the GWX dialog's behavior changed to make closing the window imply a consent to a scheduled upgrade.[340][341] Despite this, an Infoworld editor disputed the claims that upgrades had begun without any consent at all; testing showed that the upgrade to Windows 10 would only begin once the user accepts the end-user license agreement (EULA) presented by its installer, and that not doing so would eventually cause Windows Update to time out with an error, thus halting the installation attempt. It was concluded that these users may have unknowingly clicked the "Accept" prompt without full knowledge that this would begin the upgrade.[342] In December 2016, Microsoft chief marketing officer Chris Capossela admitted that the company had "gone too far", by using this tactic, stating that "we know we want people to be running Windows 10 from a security perspective, but finding the right balance where you’re not stepping over the line of being too aggressive is something we tried and for a lot of the year I think we got it right."[343]

On January 21, 2016, Microsoft was sued in small claims court by a user whose computer, shortly after the release of the OS, had attempted to upgrade to Windows 10 without her consent. The upgrade failed, and her computer was left in an unstable state thereafter, which disrupted the ability to run her travel agency. The court ruled in favor of the user and awarded her $10,000 in damages, but Microsoft appealed. However, in May 2016, Microsoft dropped the appeal and chose to pay the damages. Shortly after the suit was reported on by the Seattle Times, Microsoft confirmed that it was updating the GWX software once again to add more explicit options for opting out of a free Windows 10 upgrade;[344][345][341] the final notification was a full-screen pop-up window notifying users of the impending end of the free upgrade offer, and contained "Remind me later", "Do not notify me again" and "Notify me three more times" options.[346]

Privacy and data collection[edit]
Privacy advocates and other critics have expressed concern regarding Windows 10's privacy policies and its collection and use of customer data.[347] Under the default "Express" settings, Windows 10 is configured to send various information to Microsoft and other parties, including the collection of user contacts, calendar data, and "associated input data" to personalize "speech, typing, and inking input", typing and inking data to improve recognition, allowing apps to use a unique "advertising ID" for analytics and advertising personalization (functionality introduced by Windows 8.1)[348] and allow apps to request the user's location data and send this data to Microsoft and "trusted partners" to improve location detection (Windows 8 had similar settings, except that location data collection did not include "trusted partners"[297]). Users can opt out from most of this data collection,[297][347] but telemetry data for error reporting and usage is also sent to Microsoft, and this cannot be disabled on non-Enterprise versions of Windows 10.[297] Microsoft's privacy policy states, however, that "Basic"-level telemetry data is anonymized and cannot be used to identify an individual user or device.[349] The use of Cortana also requires the collection of data "such as your device location, data from your calendar, the apps you use, data from your emails and text messages, who you call, your contacts and how often you interact with them on your device” to personalize its functionality.[347][350]

Rock Paper Shotgun writer Alec Meer argued that Microsoft's intent for this data collection lacked transparency, stating that "there is no world in which 45 pages of policy documents and opt-out settings split across 13 different settings screens and an external website constitutes 'real transparency'."[347] ExtremeTech pointed out that, while previously scroogling against Google for similar data collection strategies, Microsoft now hoovers up your data in ways that would make Google jealous."[297] However, it was also pointed out that the requirement for such vast usage of customer data had become a norm, citing the increased reliance on cloud computing and other forms of external processing, as well as similar data collection requirements for services on mobile devices such as Google Now and Siri.[347][350] In August 2015, Russian politician Nikolai Levichev called for Windows 10 to be banned from use within the Russian government, as it sends user data to servers in the United States. The country had passed a federal law requiring all online services to store the data of Russian users on servers within the country by September 2016, or be blocked.[351][352][353] Writing for ZDNet, Ed Bott said that the lack of complaints by businesses about privacy in Windows 10 indicated "how utterly normal those privacy terms are in 2015."[354] In a Computerworld editorial, Preston Gralla stated that "the kind of information Windows 10 gathers is no different from what other operating systems gather. But Microsoft is held to a different standard than other companies."[355]

Microsoft Services Agreement reads that the company's online services may automatically "download software updates or configuration changes, including those that prevent you from accessing the Services, playing counterfeit games, or using unauthorized hardware peripheral devices." Critics interpreted this statement as implying that Microsoft would scan for and delete unlicensed software installed on devices running Windows 10.[356] However, others pointed out that this agreement was specifically for Microsoft online services such as Microsoft account, Office 365, Skype, as well as Xbox Live, and that the offending passage most likely referred to digital rights management on Xbox consoles and first-party games, and not plans to police pirated video games installed on Windows 10 PCs.[356][357] Despite this, some torrent trackers announced plans to block Windows 10 users, also arguing that the operating system could send information to anti-piracy groups that are affiliated with Microsoft.[358] Writing about these allegations, Ed Bott of ZDNet compared Microsoft's privacy policy to Apple's and Google's and concluded that "after carefully reading the Microsoft Services Agreement, the Windows license agreement...and the Microsoft Privacy Statement carefully, I don't see anything that looks remotely like Big Brother."[354] Columnist Kim Komando argued that "Microsoft might in the future run scans and disable software or hardware it sees as a security threat," consistent with the Windows 10 update policy.[359]

Windows 8 is a personal computer operating system developed by Microsoft as part of the Windows NT family of operating systems. Development of Windows 8 started before the release of its predecessor, Windows 7, in 2009. It was announced at CES 2011, and followed by the release of three pre-release versions from September 2011 to May 2012. The operating system was released to manufacturing on August 1, 2012, and was released for general availability on October 26, 2012.[5]

Windows 8 introduced major changes to the operating system's platform and user interface to improve its user experience on tablets, where Windows was now competing with mobile operating systems, including Android and iOS.[6] In particular, these changes included a touch-optimized Windows shell based on Microsoft's "Metro" design language, the Start screen (which displays programs and dynamically updated content on a grid of tiles), a new platform for developing "apps" with an emphasis on touchscreen input, integration with online services (including the ability to synchronize apps and settings between devices), and Windows Store, an online store for downloading and purchasing new software. Windows 8 added support for USB 3.0, Advanced Format hard drives, near field communications, and cloud computing. Additional security features were introduced, such as built-in antivirus software, integration with Microsoft SmartScreen phishing filtering service and support for UEFI Secure Boot on supported devices with UEFI firmware, to prevent malware from infecting the boot process.

Windows 8 was released to a mixed critical reception. Although reaction towards its performance improvements, security enhancements, and improved support for touchscreen devices was positive, the new user interface of the operating system was widely criticized for being potentially confusing and difficult to learn, especially when used with a keyboard and mouse instead of a touchscreen. Despite these shortcomings, 60 million Windows 8 licenses were sold through January 2013, a number that included both upgrades and sales to OEMs for new PCs.[7]

On October 17, 2013, Microsoft released Windows 8.1. It addressed some aspects of Windows 8 that were criticized by reviewers and early adopters and incorporated additional improvements to various aspects of the operating system.[8][9] Windows 8 was ultimately succeeded by Windows 10 in July 2015. Support for Windows 8 RTM ended on January 12, 2016; per Microsoft lifecycle policies regarding service packs, Windows 8.1 must be installed to maintain support and receive further updates.[10]

Contents  [hide]
1	Development history
1.1	Early development
1.2	Previews
1.3	Release
2	New and changed features
2.1	Safety and security
2.2	Online services and functionality
2.3	Windows Store apps
2.3.1	Web browsers
2.4	Interface and desktop
3	Removed features
4	Hardware requirements
4.1	PCs
4.2	Tablets and convertibles
5	Editions
6	Software compatibility
7	Reception
7.1	Pre-release
7.2	Critical reception
7.3	Market share and sales
7.4	Chinese government ban
8	Windows 8.1
9	See also
10	References
11	Further reading
Development history[edit]
Early development[edit]
Windows 8 development started before Windows 7 had shipped in 2009.[11] At the Consumer Electronics Show in January 2011, it was announced that the next version of Windows would add support for ARM system-on-chips alongside the existing x86 processors produced by vendors, especially AMD and Intel. Windows division president Steven Sinofsky demonstrated an early build of the port on prototype devices, while Microsoft CEO Steve Ballmer announced the company's goal for Windows to be "everywhere on every kind of device without compromise."[12][13][14][15] Details also began to surface about a new application framework for Windows 8 codenamed "Jupiter", which would be used to make "immersive" applications using XAML (similarly to Windows Phone and Silverlight) that could be distributed via a new packaging system and a rumored application store.[16]

Three milestone releases of Windows 8 leaked to the general public. Milestone 1, Build 7850, was leaked on April 12, 2011.[17] It was the first build where the text of a window was written centered instead of aligned to the left. It was also probably the first appearance of the Metro-style font, and its wallpaper had the text shhh... let's not leak our hard work. However, its detailed build number reveals that the build was created on September 22, 2010.[18] The leaked copy was Enterprise edition. The OS still reads as "Windows 7". Milestone 2, Build 7955, was leaked on April 25, 2011. The traditional Blue Screen of Death (BSoD) was replaced by a new black screen, although this was later scrapped.[19] This build introduced a new ribbon in Windows Explorer. Build 7959, with minor changes but the first 64-bit version, was leaked on May 1, 2011. The "Windows 7" logo was temporarily replaced with text displaying "Microsoft Confidential". On June 17, 2011, build 7989 64-bit edition was leaked. It introduced a new boot screen featuring the same fish as the default Windows 7 Beta wallpaper, which was later scrapped, and the circling dots as featured in the final (although the final version comes with smaller circling dots throbber). It also had the text Welcome below them, although this was also scrapped.[20]

On June 1, 2011, Microsoft unveiled Windows 8's new user interface, as well as additional features at both Computex Taipei and the D9: All Things Digital conference in California.[21][22]

The "Building Windows 8" blog launched on August 15, 2011, featuring details surrounding Windows 8's features and its development process.[23]

Previews[edit]

A screenshot of Windows 8 Developer Preview running on a multi-monitor system, showcasing some features
Microsoft unveiled more Windows 8 features and improvements on the first day of the Build conference on September 13, 2011.[24] Microsoft released the first public beta build of Windows 8, Windows Developer Preview (build 8102) at the event. A Samsung tablet running the build was also distributed to conference attendees.

The build was released for download later in the day in standard 32-bit and 64-bit versions, plus a special 64-bit version which included SDKs and developer tools (Visual Studio Express and Expression Blend) for developing Metro-style apps.[25] The Windows Store was announced during the presentation, but was not available in this build.[26][27] According to Microsoft, there were about 535,000 downloads of the developer preview within the first 12 hours of its release.[28] Originally set to expire on March 11, 2012, in February 2012 the Developer Preview's expiry date was changed to January 15, 2013.[29]


The new File Explorer interface with "Ribbon" in Windows 8
On February 19, 2012, Microsoft unveiled a new logo to be adopted for Windows 8. Designed by Pentagram partner Paula Scher, the Windows logo was changed to resemble a set of four window panes. Additionally, the entire logo is now rendered in a single solid color.[30]

On February 29, 2012, Microsoft released Windows 8 Consumer Preview, the beta version of Windows 8, build 8250. Alongside other changes, the build removed the Start button from the taskbar for the first time since its debut on Windows 95; according to Windows manager Chaitanya Sareen, the Start button was removed to reflect their view that on Windows 8, the desktop was an "app" itself, and not the primary interface of the operating system.[31][32] Windows president Steven Sinofsky said more than 100,000 changes had been made since the developer version went public.[32] The day after its release, Windows 8 Consumer Preview had been downloaded over one million times.[33] Like the Developer Preview, the Consumer Preview expired on January 15, 2013.

Many other builds were released until the Japan's Developers Day conference, when Steven Sinofsky announced that Windows 8 Release Preview (build 8400) would be released during the first week of June.[34] On May 28, 2012, Windows 8 Release Preview (Standard Simplified Chinese x64 edition, not China-specific version, build 8400) was leaked online on various Chinese and BitTorrent websites.[35] On May 31, 2012, Windows 8 Release Preview was released to the public by Microsoft.[36] Major items in the Release Preview included the addition of Sports, Travel, and News apps, along with an integrated version of Adobe Flash Player in Internet Explorer.[37] Like the Developer Preview and the Consumer Preview, the release preview expired on January 15, 2013.

Release[edit]

Windows 8 launch event at Pier 57 in New York City
On August 1, 2012, Windows 8 (build 9200[38]) was released to manufacturing with the build number 6.2.9200.16384 .[39] Microsoft planned to hold a launch event on October 25, 2012[40] and release Windows 8 for general availability on the next day.[41] However, only a day after its release to manufacturing, a copy of the final version of Windows 8 Enterprise N (a version for European markets which lacks bundled media players to comply with an antitrust ruling) leaked online, followed by leaks of the final versions of Windows 8 Pro and Enterprise a few days later.[42][43] On August 15, 2012, Windows 8 was made available to download for MSDN and TechNet subscribers.[44] Windows 8 was made available to Software Assurance customers on August 16, 2012.[45] Windows 8 was made available for students with a DreamSpark Premium subscription on August 22, 2012, earlier than advertised.[46]

Relatively few changes were made from the Release Preview to the final version; these included updated versions of its pre-loaded apps, the renaming of Windows Explorer to File Explorer, the replacement of the Aero Glass theme from Windows Vista and 7 with a new flat and solid-colored theme, and the addition of new background options for the Start screen, lock screen, and desktop.[47] Prior to its general availability on October 26, 2012, updates were released for some of Windows 8's bundled apps, and a "General Availability Cumulative Update" (which included fixes to improve performance, compatibility, and battery life) was released on Tuesday, October 9, 2012. Microsoft indicated that due to improvements to its testing infrastructure, general improvements of this nature are to be released more frequently through Windows Update instead of being relegated to OEMs and service packs only.[48][49]

Microsoft began an advertising campaign centered around Windows 8 and its Surface tablet in October 2012, starting with its first television advertisement premiering on October 14, 2012.[6] Microsoft's advertising budget of US$1.5–1.8 billion was significantly larger than the US$200 million campaign used to promote Windows 95.[50] As part of its campaign, Microsoft set up 34 pop-up stores inside malls to showcase the Surface product line, provided training for retail employees in partnership with Intel, and collaborated with the electronics store chain Best Buy to design expanded spaces to showcase devices. In an effort to make retail displays of Windows 8 devices more "personal", Microsoft also developed a character known in English-speaking markets as "Allison Brown", whose fictional profile (including personal photos, contacts, and emails) is also featured on demonstration units of Windows 8 devices.[51]


Windows 8 Pro DVD case, containing a 32-bit and a 64-bit installation disc
In May 2013, Microsoft launched a new television campaign for Windows 8 illustrating the capabilities and pricing of Windows 8 tablets in comparison to the iPad, which featured the voice of Siri remarking on the iPad's limitations in a parody of Apple's "Get a Mac" advertisements.[52][53] On June 12, 2013 during game 1 of the 2013 Stanley Cup Finals, Microsoft premiered the first ad in its "Windows Everywhere" campaign, which promoted Windows 8, Windows Phone 8, and the company's suite of online services as an interconnected platform.[54][55]

New and changed features[edit]
Main article: Features new to Windows 8
New features and functionality in Windows 8 include a faster startup through UEFI integration and the new "Hybrid Boot" mode (which hibernates the Windows kernel on shutdown to speed up the subsequent boot),[56] a new lock screen with a clock and notifications,[57] and the ability for enterprise users to create live USB versions of Windows (known as Windows To Go).[58][59] Windows 8 also adds native support for USB 3.0 devices, which allow for faster data transfers and improved power management with compatible devices,[60][61] and hard disk 4KB Advanced Format support,[62] as well as support for near field communication to facilitate sharing and communication between devices.[63]

Windows Explorer, which has been renamed File Explorer, now includes a ribbon in place of the command bar. File operation dialog boxes have been updated to provide more detailed statistics, the ability to pause file transfers, and improvements in the ability to manage conflicts when copying files.[64] A new "File History" function allows incremental revisions of files to be backed up to and restored from a secondary storage device,[65] while Storage Spaces allows users to combine different sized hard disks into virtual drives and specify mirroring, parity, or no redundancy on a folder-by-folder basis.[66] For easier management of files and folders, Windows 8 introduces the ability to move selected files or folders via drag and drop from a parent folder into a subfolder listed within the breadcrumb hierarchy of the address bar in File Explorer.[67]

Task Manager has been redesigned, including a new processes tab with the option to display fewer or more details of running applications and background processes, a heat map using different colors indicating the level of resource usage, network and disk counters, grouping by process type (e.g. applications, background processes and Windows processes), friendly names for processes and a new option which allows users to search the web to find information about obscure processes.[68] Additionally, the Blue Screen of Death has been updated with a simpler and modern design with less technical information displayed.[69][70]

Safety and security[edit]
New security features in Windows 8 include two new authentication methods tailored towards touchscreens (PINs and picture passwords),[71] the addition of antivirus capabilities to Windows Defender (bringing it in parity with Microsoft Security Essentials).[72] SmartScreen filtering integrated into Windows,[73] Family Safety offers Parental controls, which allows parents to monitor and manage their children's activities on a device with activity reports and safety controls.[74][75][76] Windows 8 also provides integrated system recovery through the new "Refresh" and "Reset" functions,[77] including system recovery from USB drive.[78] Windows 8's first security patches would be released on November 13, 2012; it would contain three fixes deemed "critical" by the company.[79]

Windows 8 supports a feature of the UEFI specification known as "Secure boot", which uses a public-key infrastructure to verify the integrity of the operating system and prevent unauthorized programs such as bootkits from infecting the device's boot process.[80] Some pre-built devices may be described as "certified" by Microsoft; these must have secure boot enabled by default, and provide ways for users to disable or re-configure the feature. ARM-based Windows RT devices must have secure boot permanently enabled.[81][82][83]

Online services and functionality[edit]
Windows 8 provides heavier integration with online services from Microsoft and others. A user can now log into Windows with a Microsoft account, which can be used to access services and synchronize applications and settings between devices. Windows 8 also ships with a client app for Microsoft's SkyDrive cloud storage service, which also allows apps to save files directly to SkyDrive. A SkyDrive client for the desktop and File Explorer is not included in Windows 8, and must be downloaded separately.[84] Bundled multimedia apps are provided under the Xbox brand, including Xbox Music, Xbox Video, and the Xbox SmartGlass companion for use with an Xbox 360 console. Games can integrate into an Xbox Live hub app, which also allows users to view their profile and gamerscore.[85] Other bundled apps provide the ability to link Flickr and Facebook.[86] Due to Facebook Connect service changes, Facebook support is disabled in all bundled apps effective June 8, 2015.[87]

Internet Explorer 10 is included as both a desktop program and a touch-optimized app, and includes increased support for HTML5, CSS3, and hardware acceleration. The Internet Explorer app does not support plugins or ActiveX components, but includes a version of Adobe Flash Player that is optimized for touch and low power usage. Initially, Adobe Flash would only work on sites included on a "Compatibility View" whitelist; however, after feedback from users and additional compatibility tests, an update in March 2013 changed this behavior to use a smaller blacklist of sites with known compatibility issues instead, allowing Flash to be used on most sites by default.[88] The desktop version does not contain these limitations.[89]

Windows 8 also incorporates improved support for mobile broadband; the operating system can now detect the insertion of a SIM card and automatically configure connection settings (including APNs and carrier branding), and reduce its Internet usage in order to conserve bandwidth on metered networks. Windows 8 also adds an integrated airplane mode setting to globally disable all wireless connectivity as well. Carriers can also offer account management systems through Windows Store apps, which can be automatically installed as a part of the connection process and offer usage statistics on their respective tile.[90]

Windows Store apps[edit]

Snap feature: Xbox Music, alongside Photos snapped into a sidebar to the right side of the screen

Snap feature: Desktop, along Wikipedia App snapped into a sidebar to the right side of the screen. In Windows 8, desktop and everything on it are treated as one Metro-style app.
Windows 8 introduces a new style of application, Windows Store apps. According to Microsoft developer Jensen Harris, these apps are to be optimized for touchscreen environments and are more specialized than current desktop applications. Apps can run either in a full-screen mode, or be snapped to the side of a screen.[91] Apps can provide toast notifications on screen or animate their tiles on the Start screen with dynamic content. Apps can use "contracts"; a collection of hooks to provide common functionality that can integrate with other apps, including search and sharing.[91] Apps can also provide integration with other services; for example, the People app can connect to a variety of different social networks and services (such as Facebook, Skype, and People service), while the Photos app can aggregate photos from services such as Facebook and Flickr.[86]

Windows Store apps run within a new set of APIs known as Windows Runtime, which supports programming languages such as C, C++, Visual Basic .NET, C#, along with HTML5 and JavaScript.[91] If written in some "high-level" languages, apps written for Windows Runtime can be compatible with both Intel and ARM versions of Windows,[92] otherwise they are not binary code compatible. Components may be compiled as Windows Runtime Components, permitting consumption by all compatible languages.[93] To ensure stability and security, apps run within a sandboxed environment, and require permissions to access certain functionality, such as accessing the Internet or a camera.[94]

Retail versions of Windows 8 are only able to install these apps through Windows Store — a namesake distribution platform that offers both apps, and listings for desktop programs certified for comparability with Windows 8.[92][94] A method to sideload apps from outside Windows Store is available to devices running Windows 8 Enterprise and joined to a domain; Windows 8 Pro and Windows RT devices that are not part of a domain can also sideload apps, but only after special product keys are obtained through volume licensing.[95]

The term "Immersive app" had been used internally by Microsoft developers to refer to the apps prior to the first official presentation of Windows 8, after which they were referred to as "Metro-style apps" in reference to the Metro design language. The term was phased out in August 2012; a Microsoft spokesperson denied rumors that the change was related to a potential trademark issue, and stated that "Metro" was only a codename that would be replaced prior to Windows 8's release.[16][96] Following these reports, the terms "Modern UI-style apps",[97] "Windows 8-style apps"[98] and "Windows Store apps" began to be used by various Microsoft documents and material to refer to the new apps. In an interview on September 12, 2012, Soma Somasegar (vice president of Microsoft's development software division) confirmed that "Windows Store apps" would be the official term for the apps.[99] An MSDN page explaining the Metro design language uses the term "Modern design" to refer to the language as a whole.[100]

Web browsers[edit]
Exceptions to the restrictions faced by Windows Store apps are given to web browsers. The user's default browser can distribute a Metro-style web browser in same package as the desktop version, which has access to functionality unavailable to other apps, such as being able to permanently run in the background, use multiple background processes, and use Windows API code instead of WinRT (allowing for code to be re-used with the desktop version, while still taking advantage of features available to Windows Store apps, such as charms). Microsoft advertises this exception privilege "New experience enabled" (formerly "Metro-style enabled").

The developers of both Chrome and Firefox committed to developing Metro-style versions of their browsers; while Chrome's "Windows 8 mode" (discontinued on Chrome version 49) uses a full-screen version of the existing desktop interface, Firefox's version (which was first made available on the "Aurora" release channel in September 2013) uses a touch-optimized interface inspired by the Android version of Firefox. In October 2013, Chrome's app was changed to mimic the desktop environment used by Chrome OS.[101][102][103][104][105][106] Development of the Firefox app for Windows 8 has since been cancelled, citing a lack of user adoption for the beta versions.[107]

Interface and desktop[edit]
Windows 8 introduces significant changes to the operating system's user interface, many of which are aimed at improving its experience on tablet computers and other touchscreen devices. The new user interface is based on Microsoft's Metro design language, and uses a Start screen similar to that of Windows Phone 7 as the primary means of launching applications. The Start screen displays a customizable array of tiles linking to various apps and desktop programs, some of which can display constantly updated information and content through "live tiles".[91] As a form of multi-tasking, apps can be snapped to the side of a screen.[91] Alongside the traditional Control Panel, a new simplified and touch-optimized settings app known as "PC Settings" is used for basic configuration and user settings. It does not include many of the advanced options still accessible from the normal Control Panel.[108]

A vertical toolbar known as the charms[109] (accessed by swiping from the right edge of a touchscreen, or pointing the cursor at hotspots in the right corners of a screen) provides access to system and app-related functions, such as search, sharing, device management, settings, and a Start button.[109][110] The traditional desktop environment for running desktop applications is accessed via a tile on the Start screen. The Start button on the taskbar from previous versions of Windows has been converted into a hotspot in the lower-left corner of the screen, which displays a large tooltip displaying a thumbnail of the Start screen.[111][112] Swiping from the left edge of a touchscreen or clicking in the top-left corner of the screen allows one to switch between apps and Desktop. Pointing the cursor in the top-left corner of the screen and moving down reveals a thumbnail list of active apps.[112] Aside from the removal of the Start button and the replacement of the Aero Glass theme with a flatter and solid-colored design, the desktop interface on Windows 8 is similar to that of Windows 7.[113]

Removed features[edit]
Main article: List of features removed in Windows 8
Several notable features have been removed in Windows 8; support for playing DVD-Video was removed from Windows Media Player due to the cost of licensing the necessary decoders (especially for devices which do not include optical disc drives at all) and the prevalence of online streaming services. For the same reasons, Windows Media Center is not included by default on Windows 8, but Windows Media Center and DVD playback support can be purchased in the "Pro Pack" (which upgrades the system to Windows 8 Pro) or "Media Center Pack" add-on for Windows 8 Pro. As with prior versions, third-party DVD player software can still be used to enable DVD playback.[114]

Backup and Restore, the backup component of Windows, is deprecated. It still ships with Windows 8 and continues to work on preset schedules, but is pushed to the background and can only be accessed through a Control Panel applet called "Windows 7 File Recovery".[115]:76 Shadow Copy, a component of Windows Explorer that once saved previous versions of changed files, no longer protects local files and folders. It can only access previous versions of shared files stored on a Windows Server computer.[115]:74 The subsystem on which these components worked, however, is still available for other software to use.[115]:74

Hardware requirements[edit]
PCs[edit]
The minimum system requirements for Windows 8 are slightly higher than those of Windows 7. The CPU must support the Physical Address Extension (PAE), NX bit, and SSE2. Windows Store apps require a screen resolution of 1024×768 or higher to run; a resolution of 1366×768 or higher is required to use the snap functionality.[116] To receive certification, Microsoft requires candidate x86 systems to resume from standby in 2 seconds or less.[117]

Minimum hardware requirements for Windows 8[118]
Component	Minimum	Recommended
Processor	1 GHz clock rate
IA-32 or x64 architecture
Support for PAE, NX and SSE2[119][120]	x64 architecture
Second Level Address Translation (SLAT) support for Hyper-V
Memory (RAM)	IA-32 edition: 1 GB
x64 edition: 2 GB	4 GB
Graphics Card	DirectX 9 graphics device
WDDM 1.0 or higher driver	DirectX 10 graphics device
Display screen	N/A	1024×768 pixels
Input device	Keyboard and mouse	multi-touch display screen
Hard disk space	IA-32 edition: 16 GB
x64 edition: 20 GB	N/A
Other	N/A	UEFI v2.3.1 Errata B with Microsoft Windows Certification Authority in its database
Trusted Platform Module (TPM)
Internet connectivity
Microsoft's Connected Standby specification, which hardware vendors may optionally comply with, sets new power consumption requirements that extend above the above minimum specifications.[121] Included in this standard are a number of security-specific requirements designed to improve physical security, notably against Cold Boot Attacks.

32-bit SKUs of Windows 8 only support a maximum of 4 GB of RAM. 64-bit SKUs, however support more: Windows 8 x64 supports 128 GB while Windows 8 Pro and Enterprise x64 support 512 GB.[122]

On March 18, 2016, in response to criticism from enterprise customers, Microsoft delayed the end of support and non-critical updates for Skylake systems to July 17, 2018, but stated that they would also continue to receive security updates through the end of extended support.[123][124] On August 2016, Microsoft again extended the Skylake support policy to the date of the end of extended support for Windows 7 (January 2020).[125][126]

In January 2016, Microsoft announced that it would no longer support Windows 8.1 or 7 on devices using Intel's Skylake CPU family effective July 17, 2018, and that all future CPU microarchitectures, as well as Skylake systems after this date, would only be supported on Windows 10. After the deadline, only critical security updates were to be released for users on these platforms.[127][128][123][124] After this new policy faced criticism from users and enterprise customers, Microsoft partially retracted the change and stated that both operating systems would remain supported on Skylake hardware through the end of their Extended support lifecycle. Windows 8.1 remains officially unsupported on all newer CPU families, and neither AMD or Intel will provide official chipset drivers for Windows operating systems other than Windows 10.[129][126]

Tablets and convertibles[edit]
Microsoft released minimum hardware requirements for tablet and laplet devices to be "certified" for Windows 8, and defined a convertible form factor as a standalone device that combines the PC, display and rechargeable power source with a mechanically attached keyboard and pointing device in a single chassis. A convertible can be transformed into a tablet where the attached input devices are hidden or removed leaving the display as the only input mechanism.[130][131] On March 12, 2013, Microsoft amended its certification requirements to only require that screens on tablets have a minimum resolution of 1024×768 (down from the previous 1366×768). The amended requirement is intended to allow "greater design flexibility" for future products.[132]

Hardware certification requirements for Windows tablets[133]
Graphics card	DirectX 10 graphics device with WDDM 1.2 or higher driver
Storage	10 GB free space, after the out-of-box experience completes
Standard buttons	Power, Rotation lock, Windows key, Volume up, Volume down
Screen	Touch screen supporting a minimum of 5-point digitizers and resolution of at least 1024×768. The physical dimensions of the display panel must match the aspect ratio of the native resolution. The native resolution of the panel can be greater than 1024 (horizontally) and 768 (vertically). Minimum native color depth is 32-bits. If the display is under 1366×768, disclaimers must be included in documentation to notify users that the Snap function is not available.[132]
Camera	Minimum 720p
Accelerometer	3 axes with data rates at or above 50 Hz
USB 2.0	At least one controller and exposed port.
Connect	Wi-Fi and Bluetooth 4.0 + LE (low energy)
Other	Speaker, microphone, magnetometer and gyroscope.
If a mobile broadband device is integrated into a tablet or convertible system, then an assisted GPS radio is required. Devices supporting near field communication need to have visual marks to help users locate and use the proximity technology. The new button combination for Ctrl + Alt + Del is Windows Key + Power.

Updated certification requirements were implemented to coincide with Windows 8.1. As of 2014, all certified devices with integrated displays must contain a 720p webcam and higher quality speakers and microphones, while all certified devices that support Wi-Fi must support Bluetooth as well. As of 2015, all certified devices must contain Trusted Platform Module 2.0 chips.[134][135]

Editions[edit]
Main article: Windows 8 editions
Windows 8 is available in three different editions, of which the lowest version, branded simply as Windows 8, and Windows 8 Pro, were sold at retail in most countries, and as pre-loaded software on new computers. Each edition of Windows 8 includes all of the capabilities and features of the edition below it, and add additional features oriented towards their market segments. For example, Pro added BitLocker, Hyper-V, the ability to join a domain, and the ability to install Windows Media Center as a paid add-on. Users of Windows 8 can purchase a "Pro Pack" license that upgrades their system to Windows 8 Pro through Add features to Windows. This license also includes Windows Media Center.[136][137][138] Windows 8 Enterprise contains additional features aimed towards business environments, and is only available through volume licensing.[138] A port of Windows 8 for ARM architecture, Windows RT, is marketed as an edition of Windows 8, but was only included as pre-loaded software on devices specifically developed for it.[138]

Windows 8 was distributed as a retail box product on DVD, and through a digital download that could be converted into DVD or USB install media. As part of a launch promotion, Microsoft offered Windows 8 Pro upgrades at a discounted price of US$39.99 online, or $69.99 for retail box from its launch until January 31, 2013; afterward the Windows 8 price has been $119.99 and the Pro price $199.99.[139][140] Those who purchased new PCs pre-loaded with Windows 7 Home Basic, Home Premium, Professional, or Ultimate between June 2, 2012 and January 31, 2013 could digitally purchase a Windows 8 Pro upgrade for US$14.99.[141] Several PC manufacturers offered rebates and refunds on Windows 8 upgrades obtained through the promotion on select models, such as Hewlett-Packard (in the U.S. and Canada on select models), and Acer (in Europe on selected Ultrabook models).[142][143] During these promotions, the Windows Media Center add-on for Windows 8 Pro was also offered for free.[136]

Unlike previous versions of Windows, Windows 8 was distributed at retail in "Upgrade" licenses only, which require an existing version of Windows to install. The "full version software" SKU, which was more expensive but could be installed on computers without an eligible OS or none at all, was discontinued. In lieu of full version, a specialized "System Builder" SKU was introduced. The "System Builder" SKU replaced the original equipment manufacturer (OEM) SKU, which was only allowed to be used on PCs meant for resale, but added a "Personal Use License" exemption that officially allowed its purchase and personal use by users on homebuilt computers.[144][145][145][146]

Retail distribution of Windows 8 has since been discontinued in favor of Windows 8.1. Unlike 8, 8.1 is available as "full version software" at both retail and online for download that does not require a previous version of Windows in order to be installed. Pricing for these new copies remain identical.[147] With the retail release returning to full version software for Windows 8.1, the "Personal Use License" exemption was removed from the OEM SKU, meaning that end users building their own PCs for personal use must use the full retail version in order to satisfy the Windows 8.1 licensing requirements.[144] Windows 8.1 with Bing is a special OEM-specific SKU of Windows 8.1 subsidized by Microsoft's Bing search engine.[148]

Software compatibility[edit]
The three desktop editions of Windows 8 support 32-bit and 64-bit architectures; retail copies of Windows 8 include install DVDs for both architectures, while the online installer automatically installs the version corresponding with the architecture of the system's existing Windows installation.[136][149] The 32-bit version runs on CPUs compatible with x86 architecture 3rd generation (known as IA-32) or newer, and can run 32-bit and 16-bit applications, although 16-bit support must be enabled first.[150][151] (16-bit applications are developed for CPUs compatible with x86 2nd generation, first conceived in 1978. Microsoft started moving away from this architecture after Windows 95.[150])

The 64-bit version runs on CPUs compatible with x86 8th generation (known as x86-64, or x64) or newer, and can run 32-bit and 64-bit programs. 32-bit programs and operating system are restricted to supporting only 4 gigabytes of memory while 64-bit systems can theoretically support 2048 gigabytes of memory.[152] 64-bit operating systems require a different set of device drivers than those of 32-bit operating systems.[152]

Windows RT, the only edition of Windows 8 for systems with ARM processors, only supports applications included with the system (such as a special version of Office 2013), supplied through Windows Update, or Windows Store apps, to ensure that the system only runs applications that are optimized for the architecture. Windows RT does not support running IA-32 or x64 applications.[153] Windows Store apps can either support both the x86 and ARM architectures, or compiled to support a specific architecture.[154]

Reception[edit]

Windows 8 Ultrabooks in a Microsoft Store
Pre-release[edit]
Following the unveiling of Windows 8, Microsoft faced criticism (particularly from free software supporters) for mandating that devices receiving its optional certification for Windows 8 have secure boot enabled by default using a key provided by Microsoft. Concerns were raised that secure boot could prevent or hinder the use of alternate operating systems such as Linux. In a post discussing secure boot on the Building Windows 8 blog, Microsoft developer Tony Mangefeste indicated that vendors would provide means to customize secure boot, stating that "At the end of the day, the customer is in control of their PC. Microsoft's philosophy is to provide customers with the best experience first, and allow them to make decisions themselves."[81][155] Microsoft's certification guidelines for Windows 8 ultimately revealed that vendors would be required to provide means for users to re-configure or disable secure boot in their device's UEFI firmware. It also revealed that ARM devices (Windows RT) would be required to have secure boot permanently enabled, with no way for users to disable it. However, Tom Warren of The Verge noted that other vendors have implemented similar hardware restrictions on their own ARM-based tablet and smartphone products (including those running Microsoft's own Windows Phone platform), but still argued that Microsoft should "keep a consistent approach across ARM and x86, though, not least because of the number of users who'd love to run Android alongside Windows 8 on their future tablets."[82][82][83][156] No mandate is made regarding the installation of third-party certificates that would enable running alternative programs.[157][158][159]

Several notable video game developers criticized Microsoft for making its Windows Store a closed platform subject to its own regulations, as it conflicted with their view of the PC as an open platform. Markus "Notch" Persson (creator of the indie game Minecraft),[160] Gabe Newell (co-founder of Valve Corporation and developer of software distribution platform Steam),[161] and Rob Pardo from Activision Blizzard voiced concern about the closed nature of the Windows Store.[162] However, Tom Warren of The Verge stated that Microsoft's addition of the Store was simply responding to the success of both Apple and Google in pursuing the "curated application store approach."[163]

Critical reception[edit]
Reviews of the various editions of Windows 8 have been mixed. Tom Warren of The Verge said that although Windows 8's emphasis on touch computing was significant and risked alienating desktop users, he felt that Windows 8 tablets "[make] an iPad feel immediately out of date" due to the capabilities of the operating system's hybrid model and increased focus on cloud services.[163] David Pierce of The Verge described Windows 8 as "the first desktop operating system that understands what a computer is supposed to do in 2012" and praised Microsoft's "no compromise" approach and the operating system's emphasis on Internet connectivity and cloud services. Pierce also considered the Start Screen to be a "brilliant innovation for desktop computers" when compared with "folder-littered desktops on every other OS" because it allows users to interact with dynamic information.[164] In contrast, an ExtremeTech article said it was Microsoft "flailing"[165] and a review in PC Magazine condemned the Metro-style user interface.[166] Some of the included apps in Windows 8 were considered to be basic and lacking in functionality, but the Xbox apps were praised for their promotion of a multi-platform entertainment experience. Other improvements and features (such as File History, Storage Spaces, and the updated Task Manager) were also regarded as positive changes.[163] Peter Bright of Ars Technica wrote that while its user interface changes may overshadow them, Windows 8's improved performance, updated file manager, new storage functionality, expanded security features, and updated Task Manager were still positive improvements for the operating system. Bright also said that Windows 8's duality towards tablets and traditional PCs was an "extremely ambitious" aspect of the platform as well, but criticized Microsoft for emulating Apple's model of a closed distribution platform when implementing the Windows Store.[167]

The interface of Windows 8 has been the subject of mixed reaction. Bright wrote that its system of hot corners and edge swiping "wasn't very obvious" due to the lack of instructions provided by the operating system on the functions accessed through the user interface, even by the video tutorial added on the RTM release (which only instructed users to point at corners of the screen or swipe from its sides). Despite this "stumbling block", Bright said that Windows 8's interface worked well in some places, but began to feel incoherent when switching between the "Metro" and desktop environments, sometimes through inconsistent means.[167] Tom Warren of The Verge wrote that the new interface was "as stunning as it is surprising", contributing to an "incredibly personal" experience once it is customized by the user, but had a steep learning curve, and was awkward to use with a keyboard and mouse. He noted that while forcing all users to use the new touch-oriented interface was a risky move for Microsoft as a whole, it was necessary in order to push development of apps for the Windows Store.[163] Others, such as Adrian Kingsley-Hughes from ZDNet, considered the interface to be "clumsy and impractical" due to its inconsistent design (going as far as considering it "two operating systems unceremoniously bolted together"), and concluded that "Windows 8 wasn't born out of a need or demand; it was born out of a desire on Microsoft's part to exert its will on the PC industry and decide to shape it in a direction—touch and tablets – that allows it to compete against, and remain relevant in the face of Apple's iPad."[168]

In 2013, Frank X. Shaw, a Microsoft corporate vice president, said that while many of the negative reviews were extreme, it was a "good thing" that Microsoft was "listening to feedback and improving a product".[169]

The American Customer Satisfaction Index (ACSI) reported a decline in Microsoft's customer satisfaction, the lowest it has been since Windows Vista.[170]

Market share and sales[edit]
Microsoft says that 4 million users upgraded to Windows 8 over the weekend after its release,[171][172] which CNET says was well below Microsoft's internal projections and was described inside the company as disappointing.[173]

On November 27, 2012, Microsoft announced that it has sold 40 million licenses of Windows 8 in the first month, surpassing the pace of Windows 7.[174]

However, according to research firm NPD, sales of devices running Windows in the United States have declined 21 percent compared to the same time period in 2011.[175] As the holiday shopping season wrapped up, Windows 8 sales continued to lag, even as Apple reported brisk sales.[176] The market research firm IDC reported an overall drop in PC sales for the quarter, and said the drop may have been partly due to consumer reluctance to embrace the new features of the OS and poor support from OEM for these features.[177] This capped the first year of declining PC sales to the Asia Pacific region, as consumers bought more mobile devices than Windows PCs.[178]

Windows 8 surpassed Windows Vista in market share with a 5.1% usage rate according to numbers posted in July 2013 by Net Applications, with usage on a steady upward trajectory.[179] However, intake of Windows 8 still lags behind that of Windows Vista and Windows 7 at the same point in their release cycles. Windows 8's tablet market share has also been growing steadily, with 7.4% of tablets running Windows in Q1 2013 according to Strategy Analytics, up from nothing just a year before. However, this is still well below Android and iOS, which posted 43.4% and 48.2% market share respectively, although both operating systems have been on the market much longer than Windows 8.[180] Strategy Analytics also noted "a shortage of top tier apps" for Windows tablets despite Microsoft strategy of paying developers to create apps for the operating system (in addition to for Windows Phone).[180]

In March 2013, Microsoft also amended its certification requirements to allow tablets to use the 1024×768 resolution as a minimum; this change is expected to allow the production of certified Windows 8 tablets in smaller form factors—a market which is currently dominated by Android-based tablets.[132] Despite the reaction of industry experts, Microsoft reported that they had sold 100 million licenses in the first six months. This matched sales of Windows 7 over a similar period.[181] This statistic includes shipments to channel warehouses which now need to be sold in order to make way for new shipments.[182]

In January 2014, Hewlett-Packard began a promotion for desktops running Windows 7, saying that it was "back by popular demand". Outside sources have suggested that this might be because HP or its customers thought the Windows 8 platform would be more appropriate for mobile computing than desktop computing, or that they were looking to attract customers forced to switch from XP who wanted a more familiar interface.[183][184]

In February 2014, Bloomberg reported that Microsoft would be lowering the price of Windows 8 licenses by 70% for devices that retail under US$250; alongside the announcement that an update to the operating system would allow OEMs to produce devices with as little as 1 GB of RAM and 16 GB of storage, critics felt that these changes would help Windows compete against Linux-based devices in the low-end market, particularly those running Chrome OS. Microsoft had similarly cut the price of Windows XP licenses to compete against the early waves of Linux-based netbooks.[185][186] Reports also indicated that Microsoft was planning to offer cheaper Windows 8 licenses to OEMs in exchange for setting Internet Explorer's default search engine to Bing. Some media outlets falsely reported that the SKU associated with this plan, "Windows 8.1 with Bing", was a variant which would be a free or low-cost version of Windows 8 for consumers using older versions of Windows.[187] On April 2, 2014, Microsoft ultimately announced that it would be removing license fees entirely for devices with screens smaller than 9 inches,[188] and officially confirmed the rumored "Windows 8.1 with Bing" OEM SKU on May 23, 2014.[148]

On the information gathered by Net Applications, adoption rate in March 2015 for Windows 8.1 was at 10.55%, while the original Windows 8 was at 3.52%.[189]

Chinese government ban[edit]
In May 2014, the Government of China banned the internal purchase of Windows 8-based products under government contracts requiring "energy-efficient" devices. The Xinhua News Agency claimed that Windows 8 was being banned in protest of Microsoft's support lifecycle policy and the end of support for Windows XP (which, as of January 2014, had a market share of 49% in China), as the government "obviously cannot ignore the risks of running an OS without guaranteed technical support." However, Ni Guangnan of the Chinese Academy of Sciences had also previously warned that Windows 8 could allegedly expose users to surveillance by the United States government due to its heavy use of Internet-based services.[190][191][192][193]

In June 2014, state broadcaster China Central Television (CCTV) broadcast a news story further characterizing Windows 8 as a threat to national security. The story featured an interview with Ni Guangnan, who stated that operating systems could aggregate "sensitive user information" that could be used to "understand the conditions and activities of our national economy and society", and alleged that per documents leaked by Edward Snowden, the U.S. government had worked with Microsoft to retrieve encrypted information. Yang Min, a computer scientist at Fudan University, also stated that "the security features of Windows 8 are basically to the benefit of Microsoft, allowing them control of the users' data, and that poses a big challenge to the national strategy for information security." Microsoft denied the claims in a number of posts on the Chinese social network Sina Weibo, which stated that the company had never "assisted any government in an attack of another government or clients" or provided client data to the U.S. government, never "provided any government the authority to directly visit" or placed any backdoors in its products and services, and that it had never concealed government requests for client data.[194][195][196]

Windows 8.1[edit]
Main article: Windows 8.1
A feature update to Windows 8 known as Windows 8.1 was officially announced by Microsoft on May 14, 2013.[197][198] Following a presentation devoted to it at Build 2013, a public beta version of the upgrade was released on June 26, 2013.[199][200] Windows 8.1 was released to OEM hardware partners on August 27, 2013, and released publicly as a free download through Windows Store on October 17, 2013.[147][201][202] Volume license customers and subscribers to MSDN Plus and TechNet Plus were initially unable to obtain the RTM version upon its release; a spokesperson said the policy was changed to allow Microsoft to work with OEMs "to ensure a quality experience at general availability."[203][204] However, after criticism, Microsoft reversed its decision and released the RTM build on MSDN and TechNet on September 9, 2013.[205]

Windows 8.1 addressed a number of criticisms faced by Windows 8 upon its release, with additional customization options for the Start screen, the restoration of a visible Start button on the desktop, the ability to snap up to four apps on a single display, and the ability to boot to the desktop instead of the Start screen. Windows 8's stock apps were also updated, a new Bing-based unified search system was added, SkyDrive was given deeper integration with the operating system, and a number of new stock apps, along with a tutorial, were added.[9][206][207][208] Windows 8.1 also added support for 3D printing,[209][210] Miracast media streaming, NFC printing, and Wi-Fi Direct.[211]

Microsoft markets Windows 8.1 as an "update" rather than as a "service pack" or "upgrade".[212] However, Microsoft's support lifecycle policy treats Windows 8.1 similarly to previous Windows service packs: it is part of Windows 8's support lifecycle, and upgrading to 8.1 has been required to maintain access to mainstream support and updates after January 12, 2016.[4][213][214] Although Windows 8 RTM is unsupported, Microsoft released an emergency security patch in May 2017 for Windows 8 RTM, as well as other unsupported versions of Windows (including Windows XP and Windows Server 2003), to address a vulnerability that was being leveraged by the WannaCry ransomware attack.[215][216]

Retail and OEM installations of Windows 8, Windows 8 Pro, and Windows RT can be upgraded through Windows Store free of charge. However, volume license customers, TechNet or MSDN subscribers and users of Windows 8 Enterprise must acquire a standalone installation media for 8.1 and install through the traditional Windows setup process, either as an in-place upgrade or clean install. This requires an 8.1-specific product key.[217][218][219][220]

Windows 9x is a generic term referring to a series of Microsoft Windows computer operating systems produced from 1995 to 2000, which were based on the Windows 95 kernel and its underlying foundation of MS-DOS,[1] both of which were updated in subsequent versions. This includes all versions of Windows 95 and Windows 98. Windows ME is sometimes included.[2]

Windows 9x is predominantly known for its use in desktops. In 1998, Windows made up 82% of operating system market share.[3]

Internal release versions for versions of Windows 9x are 4.x. Previous MS-DOS based versions of Windows used version numbers of 3.2 or lower. Windows NT, which was aimed at professional users such as networks and businesses, used a similar but separate version number between 3.1 and 4.0.

The final version of Windows 9x was Windows ME, released in September 2000 with an internal version number of 4.9. All future versions of Windows, starting with Windows XP, would be based on the Windows NT codebase.

Contents  [hide]
1	History
1.1	Windows prior to 95
1.2	Windows 95
1.3	Windows 98
1.4	Windows ME
1.5	Decline
1.6	End of service life
2	Design
2.1	Kernel
2.1.1	User mode
2.1.2	Kernel mode
2.2	Registry
2.3	Virtual Machine Manager
2.4	Software support
2.4.1	File systems
2.4.2	Event logging and tracing
2.4.3	Security
2.4.4	Network sharing
2.5	Hardware support
2.5.1	Drivers
2.5.2	CPU and bus technologies
2.6	MS-DOS
2.6.1	MS-DOS Virtualization
2.6.2	MS-DOS Mode
2.7	User interface
3	See also
4	References
5	External links
History[edit]
See also: History of Microsoft Windows
Windows prior to 95[edit]
The first independent version of Microsoft Windows, version 1.0, released on 20 November 1985, achieved little popularity. It was originally going to be called "Interface Manager" but Rowland Hanson, the head of marketing at Microsoft, convinced the company that the name Windows would be more appealing to consumers. Windows 1.0 was not a complete operating system, but rather an "operating environment" that extended MS-DOS, and shared the latter's inherent flaws and problems.

The second release of Microsoft Windows, version 2.0, came out on 9 December 1987, and used the real-mode memory model, which confined it to a maximum of 1 megabyte of memory. In such a configuration, it could run under another multitasking system like DESQview, which used the 286 Protected Mode.

Microsoft Windows scored a significant success with Windows 3.0, released in 1990. In addition to improved capabilities given to native applications, Windows also allowed users to better multitask older MS-DOS based software compared to Windows/386, thanks to the introduction of virtual memory.

Microsoft developed Windows 3.1, which included several minor improvements to Windows 3.0, but primarily consisted of bugfixes and multimedia support. It also excluded support for Real mode, and only ran on an 80286 or better processor. Later Microsoft also released Windows 3.11, a touch-up to Windows 3.1 which included all of the patches and updates that followed the release of Windows 3.1 in 1992.

Meanwhile, Microsoft continued to develop Windows NT. The main architect of the system was Dave Cutler, one of the chief architects of VMS at Digital Equipment Corporation (later purchased by Compaq, now part of Hewlett-Packard).[4] Microsoft hired him in August 1988 to create a successor to OS/2, but Cutler created a completely new system instead.

Microsoft announced at the conference[which?] its intentions to develop a successor to both Windows NT and Windows 3.1's replacement (Windows 95, code-named Chicago), which would unify the two into one operating system. This successor was codenamed Cairo. In hindsight, Cairo was a much more difficult project than Microsoft had anticipated and, as a result, NT and Chicago would not be unified until Windows XP.

Windows 95[edit]
Main article: Windows 95

Windows 95 logo
After Windows 3.11, Microsoft began to develop a new consumer oriented version of the operating system code-named Chicago. Chicago was designed to have support for 32-bit preemptive multitasking like OS/2 and Windows NT, although a 16-bit kernel would remain for the sake of backward compatibility. The Win32 API first introduced with Windows NT was adopted as the standard 32-bit programming interface, with Win16 compatibility being preserved through a technique known as "thunking". A new GUI was not originally planned as part of the release, although elements of the Cairo user interface were borrowed and added as other aspects of the release (notably Plug and Play) slipped.

Microsoft did not change all of the Windows code to 32-bit; parts of it remained 16-bit (albeit not directly using real mode) for reasons of compatibility, performance and development time. Additionally it was necessary to carry over design decisions from earlier versions of Windows for reasons of backwards compatibility, even if these design decisions no longer matched a more modern computing environment. These factors immediately began to impact the operating system's efficiency and stability.

Microsoft marketing adopted Windows 95 as the product name for Chicago when it was released on August 24, 1995.

Microsoft went on to release five different versions of Windows 95:

Windows 95 - original release
Windows 95 A - included Windows 95 OSR1 slipstreamed into the installation.
Windows 95 B - (OSR2) included several major enhancements, Internet Explorer (IE) 3.0 and full FAT32 file system support.
Windows 95 B USB - (OSR2.1) included basic USB support.
Windows 95 C - (OSR2.5) included all the above features, plus IE 4.0. This was the last 95 version produced.
OSR2, OSR2.1 and OSR2.5 were not released to the general public; rather, they were available only to OEMs that would preload the OS onto computers. Some companies sold new hard drives with OSR2 preinstalled (officially justifying this as needed due to the hard drive's capacity).

The first Microsoft Plus! add-on pack was sold for Windows 95.

Windows 98[edit]
Main article: Windows 98

Windows 98 logo
On 25 June 1998, Microsoft released Windows 98. It included new hardware drivers and better support for the FAT32 file system which allows support for disk partitions larger than the 2 GB maximum accepted by Windows 95. The USB support in Windows 98 was more robust than the basic support provided by the OEM editions of Windows 95.[5] It also controversially integrated the Internet Explorer browser into the Windows GUI and Windows Explorer file manager.

In 1999, Microsoft released Windows 98 Second Edition, an interim release whose notable features were the addition of Internet Connection Sharing and improved WDM audio and modem support. Internet Connection Sharing is a form of network address translation, allowing several machines on a LAN (Local Area Network) to share a single Internet connection. Windows 98 Second Edition has certain improvements over the original release. Hardware support through device drivers was increased. Many minor problems present in the original Windows 98 were found and fixed which make it, according to many, the most stable release of Windows 9x family—to the extent that commentators used to say that Windows 98's beta version was more stable than Windows 95's final (gamma) version.[6]

Windows ME[edit]
Main article: Windows ME
In September 2000, Microsoft introduced Windows ME (Millennium Edition), which upgraded Windows 98 with enhanced multimedia and Internet features. It also introduced the first version of System Restore, which allowed users to revert their system state to a previous "known-good" point in the case of system failure. The first version of Windows Movie Maker was introduced as well.

Windows ME was conceived as a quick one-year project that served as a stopgap release between Windows 98 and Windows XP. Many of the new features were available from the Windows Update site as updates for older Windows versions. As a result, Windows ME was not acknowledged as a distinct operating system along the lines of 95 or 98, and is often included in the Windows 9x series.

Windows ME was criticized by users for its instability and unreliability, due to frequent freezes and crashes. A PC World article dubbed Windows ME the "Mistake Edition" and placed it 4th in their "Worst Tech Products of All Time" feature.[7]

The inability of users to easily boot into real mode MS-DOS, as in Windows 95 and 98, led users to quickly learn how to hack their Windows ME installations to provide the needed service.[8]

Decline[edit]
The release of Windows 2000 marked a shift in the user experience between the Windows 9x series and the Windows NT series. Windows NT 4 suffered from a lack of support for USB, Plug and Play, and DirectX, preventing its users from playing contemporary games. Windows 2000 featured an updated user interface, and better support for both Plug and Play, and USB.

The release of Windows XP signalled a change of direction for Microsoft, bringing the consumer and business operating systems together.

One by one, support for the Windows 9x series ended, and Microsoft stopped selling the software to end users, then later to OEMs. By March 2004, it was impossible to purchase any versions of the Windows 9x series.[9]

End of service life[edit]
Microsoft continued to support the use of the Windows 9x series until July 11, 2006, when extended support ended for Windows 98, Windows 98 Second Edition (SE), and Windows Millennium Edition (Me) (extended support for Windows 95 ended on 31 December 2001).[10]

Microsoft DirectX, a set of standard gaming APIs, stopped being updated on Windows 95 at Version 8.0a.[11] The last version of DirectX supported for Windows 98 and ME is 9.0.

Support for Microsoft Internet Explorer also ended with Windows 9x. The last version of Internet Explorer for Windows 95 is Internet Explorer 5.5. Internet Explorer 6 with Service Pack 1 was the last version to which the browser could be upgraded in Windows 98 and ME.[12] Internet Explorer 7, the first major update to Internet Explorer 6 in half a decade, was only available for Windows XP SP2 and Windows Vista.

The growing number of important updates caused by the end of service life of these pieces of software have slowly made Windows 9x even less practical for everyday use. Today, even open source projects such as Mozilla Firefox will not run on Windows 9x without rework.[13]

Design[edit]
Kernel[edit]
Main article: Architecture of Windows 9x
Windows 9x is a series of hybrid 16/32-bit operating systems.

Like most operating systems, Windows 9x consists of kernel space and user space memory.

Although Windows 9x features memory protection, it does not protect the first megabyte of memory from userland applications. This area of memory contains code critical to the functioning of the operating system, and by writing into this area of memory an application can crash or freeze the operating system. This was a source of instability as faulty applications could accidentally write into this region and with that halt the operating system.[14]

User mode[edit]
The user-mode parts of Windows 9x consist of three subsystems: the Win16 subsystem, the Win32 subsystem and MS-DOS.[15]

Windows 9x/ME set aside two blocks of 64 KB memory regions for GDI and heap resources. By running multiple applications, applications with numerous GDI elements or by running applications over a long span of time, it could exhaust these memory areas. If free system resources dropped below 10%, Windows would become unstable and likely crash.[16]

Kernel mode[edit]
The kernel mode parts consist of the Virtual Machine Manager (VMM), the Installable File System Manager (IFSHLP), the Configuration Manager, and in Windows 98 and later, the WDM Driver Manager (NTKERN).[17] As a 32-bit operating system, virtual memory space is 4 GiB, divided into a lower 2 GiB for applications and an upper 2 GiB for kernel per process.

Registry[edit]
Like Windows NT, Windows 9x stores user-specific and configuration-specific settings in a large information database called the Windows registry. Hardware-specific settings are also stored in the registry, and many device drivers use the registry to load configuration data. Previous versions of Windows used files such as AUTOEXEC.BAT, CONFIG.SYS, WIN.INI, SYSTEM.INI and other files with an .INI extension to maintain configuration settings. As Windows became more complex and incorporated more features, .INI files became too unwieldy for the limitations of the then-current FAT filesystem. Backwards-compatibility with .INI files was maintained until Windows XP succeeded the 9x and NT lines.

Although Microsoft discourages using .INI files in favor of Registry entries, a large number of applications (particularly 16-bit Windows-based applications) still use .INI files. Windows 9x supports .INI files solely for compatibility with those applications and related tools (such as setup programs). The AUTOEXEC.BAT and CONFIG.SYS files also still exist for compatibility with real-mode system components and to allow users to change certain default system settings such as the PATH environment variable.

The registry consists of two files: User.dat and System.dat. In Windows ME, Classes.dat was added.

Virtual Machine Manager[edit]
The Virtual Machine Manager (VMM) is the 32-bit protected mode kernel at the core of Windows 9x. Its primary responsibility is to create, run, monitor and terminate virtual machines. The VMM provides services that manage memory, processes, interrupts and protection faults. The VMM works with virtual devices (loadable kernel modules, which consist mostly of 32-bit ring 0 or kernel mode code, but may include other types of code, such as a 16-bit real mode initialisation segment) to allow those virtual devices to intercept interrupts and faults to control the access that an application has to hardware devices and installed software. Both the VMM and virtual device drivers run in a single, 32-bit, flat model address space at privilege level 0 (also called ring 0). The VMM provides multi-threaded, preemptive multitasking. It runs multiple applications simultaneously by sharing CPU (central processing unit) time between the threads in which the applications and virtual machines run.

The VMM is also responsible for creating MS-DOS environments for system processes and Windows applications that still need to run in MS-DOS mode. It is the replacement for Win386 in Windows 3.x, and the file vmm32.vxd is a compressed archive containing most of the core VxD, including VMM.vxd itself and ifsmgr.vxd (which facilitates file system access without the need to call the real mode file system code of the DOS kernel).

Software support[edit]
File systems[edit]
Windows 9x does not natively support NTFS or HPFS, but there are third-party solutions which allow Windows 9x to have read-only access to NTFS volumes.

Early versions of Windows 95 did not support FAT32.

Like Windows for Workgroups 3.11, Windows 9x provides support for 32-bit file access based on IFSHLP.SYS, and unlike Windows 3.x, Windows 9x has support for the VFAT file system, allowing file names with a maximum of 255 characters instead of having 8.3 filenames.

Event logging and tracing[edit]
Also, there is no support for event logging and tracing or error reporting which the Windows NT family of operating systems has, although software like Norton CrashGuard can be used to achieve similar capabilities on Windows 9x.

Security[edit]

This section does not cite any sources. Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (September 2009) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
Windows 9x is designed as a single-user system. Thus, the security model is much less effective than the one in Windows NT. One reason for this is the FAT file systems (including FAT12/FAT16/FAT32), which are the only ones that Windows 9x supports officially, though Windows NT also supports FAT12 and FAT16 (but not FAT32) and Windows 9x can be extended to read and write NTFS volumes using third-party Installable File System drivers. FAT systems have very limited security; every user that has access to a FAT drive also has access to all files on that drive. The FAT file systems provide no access control lists and file-system level encryption like NTFS.[18]

Some operating systems that were available at the same time as Windows 9x are either multi-user or have multiple user accounts with different access privileges, which allows important system files (such as the kernel image) to be immutable under most user accounts. In contrast, while Windows 95 and later operating systems offer the option of having profiles for multiple users, they have no concept of access privileges, making them roughly equivalent to a single-user, single-account operating system; this means that all processes can modify all files on the system that aren't open, in addition to being able to modify the boot sector and perform other low-level hard drive modifications. This enables viruses and other clandestinely installed software to integrate themselves with the operating system in a way that is difficult for ordinary users to detect or undo. The profile support in the Windows 9x family is meant for convenience only; unless some registry keys are modified, the system can be accessed by pressing "Cancel" at login, even if all profiles have a password. Windows 95's default login dialog box also allows new user profiles to be created without having to log in first.

Users and software can render the operating system unable to function by deleting or overwriting important system files from the hard disk. Users and software are also free to change configuration files in such a way that the operating system is unable to boot or properly function.

Installation software often replaced and deleted system files without properly checking if the file was still in use or of a newer version. This created a phenomenon often referred to as DLL hell.

Windows ME introduced System File Protection and System Restore to handle common problems caused by this issue.

Network sharing[edit]
Windows 9x offers share-level access control security for file and printer sharing as well as user-level access control if a Windows NT based operating system is available on the network.[19] In contrast, Windows NT-based operating systems offer only user-level access control but integrated with the operating system's own user account security mechanism.

Hardware support[edit]
Drivers[edit]
Device drivers in Windows 9x can be virtual device drivers or (starting with Windows 98) WDM drivers. VxDs usually have the filename extension .vxd or .386, whereas WDM compatible drivers usually use the extension .sys. The 32-bit VxD message server (msgsrv32) is a program that is able to load virtual device drivers (VxDs) at startup and then handle communication with the drivers. Additionally, the message server performs several background functions, including loading the Windows shell (such as Explorer.exe or Progman.exe).[20]

Another type of device drivers are .DRV drivers. These drivers are loaded in user-mode, and are commonly used to control devices such as multimedia devices. To provide access to these devices, a dynamic link library is required (such as MMSYSTEM.DLL).

Drivers written for Windows 9x/Windows ME are loaded into the same address space as the kernel. This means that drivers can by accident or design overwrite critical sections of the operating system. Doing this can lead to system crashes, freezes and disk corruption. Faulty operating system drivers were a source of instability for the operating system. Other monolithic and hybrid kernels, like Linux and Windows NT, are also susceptible to malfunctioning drivers impeding the kernel's operation.

Often the software developers of drivers and applications had insufficient experience with creating programs for the 'new' system, thus causing many errors which have been generally described as "system errors" by users, even if the error is not caused by parts of Windows or DOS. Microsoft has repeatedly redesigned the Windows Driver architecture since the release of Windows 95 as a result.

CPU and bus technologies[edit]
Windows 9x has no native support for hyper-threading, Data Execution Prevention, symmetric multiprocessing or multi-core processors.

Windows 9x has no native support for SATA host bus adapters (and neither did Windows 2000 nor Windows XP), or USB drives (except Windows ME). There are, however, many SATA-I controllers for which Windows 98/ME drivers exist, and USB mass storage support has been added to Windows 95 OSR2 and Windows 98 through third party drivers.[21][22] Hardware driver support for Windows 98/ME began to decline in 2005, most notably for motherboard chipsets and video cards.

Early versions of Windows 95 had no support for USB or AGP acceleration.

MS-DOS[edit]
Windows 95 was able to reduce the role of MS-DOS in Windows much further than had been done in Windows 3.1x and earlier. According to Microsoft developer Raymond Chen, MS-DOS served two purposes in Windows 95: as the boot loader, and as the 16-bit legacy device driver layer.[23]

When Windows 95 started up, MS-DOS loaded, processed CONFIG.SYS, launched COMMAND.COM, ran AUTOEXEC.BAT and finally ran WIN.COM. The WIN.COM program used MS-DOS to load the virtual machine manager, read SYSTEM.INI, load the virtual device drivers, and then turn off any running copies of EMM386 and switch into protected mode. Once in protected mode, the virtual device drivers (VxDs) transferred all state information from MS-DOS to the 32-bit file system manager, and then shut off MS-DOS. These VxDs allow Windows 9x to interact with hardware resources directly, as providing low-level functionalities such as 32-bit disk access and memory management. All future file system operations would get routed to the 32-bit file system manager.[23] In Windows ME, win.com was no longer executed during the startup process; instead it went directly to execute VMM32.VXD from IO.SYS.

The second role of MS-DOS (as the 16-bit legacy device driver layer) was as a backward compatibility tool for running DOS programs in Windows. Many MS-DOS programs and device drivers interacted with DOS in a low-level way; for example, by patching low-level BIOS interrupts such as int 13h, the low-level disk I/O interrupt. When a program issued an int 21h call to access MS-DOS, the call would go first to the 32-bit file system manager, which would attempt to detect this sort of patching. If it detects that the program has tried to hook into DOS, it will jump back into the 16-bit code to let the hook run. A 16-bit driver called IFSMGR.SYS would previously have been loaded by CONFIG.SYS, the job of which was to hook MS-DOS first before the other drivers and programs got a chance, then jump from 16-bit code back into 32-bit code, when the DOS program had finished, to let the 32-bit file system manager continue its work.[23] According to Windows developer Raymond Chen, "MS-DOS was just an extremely elaborate decoy. Any 16-bit drivers and programs would patch or hook what they thought was the real MS-DOS, but which was in reality just a decoy. If the 32-bit file system manager detected that somebody bought the decoy, it told the decoy to quack.[23]

MS-DOS Virtualization[edit]
Windows 9x can run MS-DOS applications within itself using a method called "Virtualization", where an application is run on a "Virtual DOS Machine".

MS-DOS Mode[edit]
Windows 95 and Windows 98 also offer regressive support for DOS applications in the form of being able to boot into a native "DOS Mode" (MS-DOS can be booted without booting Windows, not putting the CPU in protected mode). Through Windows 9x's memory managers and other post-DOS improvements, the overall system performance and functionality is improved. This differs from the emulation used in Windows NT-based operating systems. Some old applications or games may not run properly in a DOS box within Windows and require real DOS Mode.

Having a command line mode outside of the GUI also offers the ability to fix certain system errors without entering the GUI. For example, if a virus is active in GUI mode it can often be safely removed in DOS mode, by deleting its files, which are usually locked while infected in Windows.

Similarly, corrupted registry files, system files or boot files can be restored from the command line. Windows 95 and Windows 98 can be started from DOS Mode by typing 'WIN' <enter> at the command prompt. However, the Recovery Console for Windows 2000, which as a version of Windows NT played a similar role in removing viruses.

Because DOS was not designed for multitasking purposes, Windows versions such as 9x that are DOS-based lack File System security, such as file permissions. Further, if the user uses 16-bit DOS drivers, Windows can become unstable. Hard disk errors often plague the Windows 9x series.

User interface[edit]
See also: User interface
Users can control a Windows 9x-based system through a command-line interface (or CLI), or a graphical user interface (or GUI). For desktop systems, the default mode is usually graphical user interface, where the CLI is available through MS-DOS windows.

The GDI, which is a part of the Win32 and Win16 subsystems, is also a module that is loaded in user mode, unlike Windows NT where the GDI is loaded in kernel mode.

Alpha compositing and therefore transparency effects, such as fade effects in menus, are not supported by the GDI in Windows 9x.

On desktop machines, Windows Explorer is the default user interface, though a variety of additional Windows shell replacements exist.

Other GUIs include LiteStep, bbLean and Program Manager. The GUI provides a means to control the placement and appearance of individual application windows, and interacts with the Window System.

Microsoft Windows 10 (Codename: Threshold, engl. für Schwelle) ist ein Betriebssystem des US-amerikanischen Unternehmens Microsoft, das am 29. Juli 2015 veröffentlicht wurde. Es ist der Nachfolger von Windows 8.1 und wurde parallel zu Microsoft Windows Server 2016, dem Nachfolger von Microsoft Windows Server 2012 R2, erstmals am 30. September 2014 vorgestellt.[2][3]

Seit dem 1. Oktober 2014 wurden „Technical Preview“, später „Insider Preview“ genannte Vorabversionen von Windows 10 veröffentlicht.[4][5] Das Betriebssystem wurde Benutzern der Vorgänger Windows 7 und Windows 8 bis zum 29. Juli 2016[6] kostenlos angeboten, wenn es sich zuvor nicht um eine Volumenlizenz handelte.[7]

Das Pendant des Betriebssystems für einige mobile Geräte wie Smartphones wird als Windows 10 Mobile bezeichnet.

Inhaltsverzeichnis [Verbergen]
1	Neues Release-Modell
2	Neuerungen
2.1	Neues Startmenü
2.2	Virtuelle Desktops
2.3	Personal Assistant „Cortana“
2.4	Webbrowser Microsoft Edge
2.5	Windows Holographic
2.6	Sicherheitsfunktionen
2.7	Multimedia
2.8	Apps
2.9	Datenübertragung
2.10	Windows Spotlight
3	Editionen
3.1	Desktop und Notebook
3.2	Kleine Mobilgeräte
3.3	Internet der Dinge
4	Verfügbarkeit
5	Systemanforderungen
6	Support und Aktualisierungen
6.1	Versionsgeschichte
7	Namensgebung
8	Kontroversen und Kritik
8.1	Datenschutz
8.2	Wechsel von Standardprogrammen
8.3	Kontroversen um die geänderte Update-Prozedur
8.4	Aufdringliche Upgrade-Aufforderungen
9	Literatur
10	Weblinks
11	Einzelnachweise
Neues Release-Modell[Bearbeiten | Quelltext bearbeiten]
Microsoft sieht Windows 10 als letzte Windows-Version nach dem klassischen Versionierungsmuster an. In Zukunft wolle man keine neuen Versionen mehr veröffentlichen; stattdessen sehe man „Windows as a service“: Nutzer von Windows 10 sollen nicht nur Fehlerkorrekturen erhalten, sondern auch neue Funktionen, die zum Zeitpunkt der ursprünglichen Installation noch gar nicht enthalten waren.[8]

Neuerungen[Bearbeiten | Quelltext bearbeiten]
Windows 10 ist sowohl auf einem Desktop-Computer und Notebook, als auch auf einem Tabletcomputer, Smartphone, Convertible, eingebetteten System, Raspberry Pi 2 & 3[9], Xbox One und der HoloLens lauffähig und stellt somit eine einheitliche Softwareplattform für verschiedene Geräteklassen dar. Dabei passt sich die grafische Benutzeroberfläche je nach Typ des Gerätes an dessen Eigenschaften an.

Bei Convertibles kann Windows 10 mithilfe der neuen „Continuum“-Funktion automatisch erkennen, ob eine Tastatur angeschlossen ist oder nicht, und passt die Bedienoberfläche entsprechend an.[10]

Neues Startmenü[Bearbeiten | Quelltext bearbeiten]
Während in Windows 8 das Startmenü entfernt und stattdessen eine sogenannte Startseite angeboten wurde, erhält das Startmenü in einer überarbeiteten Version wieder Einzug in Windows 10: Es bietet die bekannte Übersicht über alle installierten Apps, Schaltflächen unter anderem für das Herunterfahren des Systems und die Möglichkeit, Programmverknüpfungen, ähnlich wie bei der mit Windows 8 eingeführten Startseite, in Form von Kacheln anzuheften. Auf diese Art wird die Funktion des Startbildschirms in das Startmenü integriert. Da das Startmenü in seiner Größe anpassbar ist und sich auch bildschirmfüllend verwenden lässt, ersetzt dieses den Startbildschirm.

Virtuelle Desktops[Bearbeiten | Quelltext bearbeiten]
In Windows 10 gibt es virtuelle Desktops, mit denen mehrere Desktops für verschiedene Bereiche angelegt und genutzt werden können.[11] Auf jedem virtuellen Desktop können unterschiedliche Anwendungen abgelegt werden. Mithilfe der „Task-Ansicht“, die über eine Schaltfläche auf der Taskleiste oder den Tastatur-Shortcut Windowstaste + ↹  erreicht werden kann, lassen sich die Desktops verwalten und Anwendungsfenster zwischen ihnen austauschen. Außerdem kann mit den Shortcuts Strg + Windowstaste + ← / → zwischen den Desktops gewechselt werden und mit Strg + Windowstaste + F4 einer entfernt werden.

Personal Assistant „Cortana“[Bearbeiten | Quelltext bearbeiten]
→ Hauptartikel: Cortana (Software)
Wie bereits bei Windows Phone 8.1 erhält der Personal Assistant Cortana auch in Windows 10 Einzug. Hierbei wird die aus Windows 8.1 bekannte Suchfunktion durch Cortana ergänzt. Diese lässt sich wahlweise über Tastatureingaben oder Spracheingaben steuern.[12]

Webbrowser Microsoft Edge[Bearbeiten | Quelltext bearbeiten]
→ Hauptartikel: Microsoft Edge
In Windows 10 ist ein neuer Webbrowser enthalten, der schneller, effizienter und personalisierbarer sein soll.[13][14] Drei neue Merkmale wurden von Microsoft im Vorfeld präsentiert: Webseiten können mit Notizen versehen werden und das so ähnlich einem Screenshot entstandene Dokument gespeichert und Freunden oder Kollegen zur Verfügung gestellt werden; ein „Lesemodus“ blendet den Lesefluss störende Elemente aus, und ein Instapaper ähnelnder Lesezeichen-Service ist in den Browser integriert.[15]

Edge nutzt anstatt dem im Internet Explorer verwendeten HTML-Renderer Trident die neue „Engine“ EdgeHTML.[16]

Windows Holographic[Bearbeiten | Quelltext bearbeiten]
→ Hauptartikel: Windows Holographic
Windows Holographic ist eine Plattform für Anwendungen im Bereich erweiterte Realität. Die dazugehörige Datenbrille wurde unter der Bezeichnung HoloLens eingeführt.

Sicherheitsfunktionen[Bearbeiten | Quelltext bearbeiten]
Windows 10 unterstützt den Standard 2.0 der FIDO-Allianz für die Authentifizierung im Internet.[17] Dazu sind sowohl der Standard U2F für die universelle Zwei-Faktor-Authentifizierung als auch der Standard UAF für die universelle Authentifikation ohne Passwort implementiert worden.[18] In diesem Rahmen wurde die Möglichkeit einer biometrischen Authentifizierung von Benutzern unter dem Begriff „Microsoft Hello“ eingeführt.[19]

Multimedia[Bearbeiten | Quelltext bearbeiten]
Der Media Player von Windows 10 kann standardmäßig Videodaten mit High Efficiency Video Coding (HEVC) abspielen sowie Dateien im Containerformat Matroska öffnen.[20]

In Windows 10 ist DirectX 12 integriert,[21] das die Leistung durch hardwarenahe Programmierung verbessern soll.

Apps[Bearbeiten | Quelltext bearbeiten]
Für Windows 10 gibt es nicht mehr unterschiedliche Versionen des Windows-Store (zuvor gab es einen für Windows Phone und einen anderen für Windows 8 und dessen Nachfolgesysteme), sondern einen einheitlichen Store für alle Ausführungen von Windows 10.[22] Apps aus dem Windows-Store, die in der Vergangenheit nur bildschirmfüllend verwendet werden konnten, können nun in Fenstern ausgeführt und damit umfangreich in ihrer Darstellungsgröße verändert werden.[23] Eine Reihe an Apps wird direkt mit dem Betriebssystem ausgeliefert, dazu gehört neben Microsoft Edge auch eine eingeschränkte Ausführung von Microsoft OneNote. OneDrive nimmt für die Synchronisation zwischen verschiedenen Microsoft-Geräten eine zentrale Rolle ein. So sollen auch in der neuen Xbox-App alle Spiele angezeigt werden, die der Anwender auf seinen Geräten installiert hat, und diese plattformübergreifend gespielt werden können. Bei der Präsentation demonstrierte man etwa ein auf der Xbox One gestartetes Multiplayer-Spiel, dem eine auf einem PC spielende zweite Person beitrat.[21]

Anwendungen für Windows 10 basieren auf der Universal Windows Platform (auch: UWP), mit der sie sich für unterschiedliche Geräte mit derselben Codebasis entwickeln lassen.

Datenübertragung[Bearbeiten | Quelltext bearbeiten]
Mit den Standardeinstellungen, wie sie Windows 10 bei der Expressinstallation vorschlägt, überträgt Windows 10 eine Vielzahl von Daten an Microsoft. Für den Sprachassistenten Cortana nutzt Microsoft z. B. den Kommunikationsverlauf und die Inhalte von Nachrichten. Außerdem werden unter anderem folgende Informationen verwendet: Standortinformationen und -verlauf des Geräts, Kontakte, Spracheingaben, Suchverlauf, Kalenderinformationen. Diese Informationen werden auf einem Microsoft-Server im Internet gespeichert. Die übertragenen Daten umfassen außerdem eine appübergreifende Werbe-ID, mit der es möglich ist, einen Benutzer bei der Benutzung unterschiedlicher Apps eindeutig zu identifizieren und ihm personalisierte Werbung anzuzeigen, sobald er Seiten im Internet aufruft. Übertragen werden außerdem nicht näher benannte Informationen zum Schreibverhalten und Informationen zur Standortbestimmung (z. B. über WLANs in der Umgebung). Außerdem gewährt Windows 10 vielen Apps standardmäßig Zugriff auf Webcam und Mikrofon.[24]

Windows Spotlight[Bearbeiten | Quelltext bearbeiten]
→ Hauptartikel: Windows Spotlight
Verschiedene Bilder, die von der Suchmaschine Bing bereitgestellt werden, erscheinen auf dem Sperrbildschirm. Der Nutzer kann diese Bilder bewerten. Zudem kann der Nutzer entscheiden, ob er ähnliche Bilder in Zukunft sehen möchte oder nicht.

Editionen[Bearbeiten | Quelltext bearbeiten]
Windows 10 ist in unterschiedlichen Editionen erhältlich, aufgeteilt nach Zielgruppe und Einsatzzweck.[25][26]

Desktop und Notebook[Bearbeiten | Quelltext bearbeiten]
Windows 10 Home für Heimanwender im Privathaushalt
Windows 10 Pro für Heimanwender und Unternehmen
Windows 10 Pro for Workstations für Heimanwender und Unternehmen mit anspruchsvollen Bedürfnisse an rechenintensive Arbeitslasten und mit servergleicher Hardware[27]
Windows 10 Enterprise, mit zusätzlichen Funktionen für Unternehmen
Windows 10 Enterprise LTSB, berechtigt zusätzlich zur Nutzung des Long-Term Servicing Branch (LTSB), welcher 10 Jahre Unterstützung ohne Funktionsupgrades ermöglicht[28]
Windows 10 Education als spezielle Version der Enterprise Edition für Bildungseinrichtungen
Windows 10 Pro Education für Bildungseinrichtungen, die auf PCs vorinstalliert ausgeliefert werden darf. Mit der Pro-Version vergleichbar. Seit dem Anniversary Update verfügbar[29]
Windows 10 S als reduzierte Variante, auf der nur Anwendungen aus dem Windows Store installiert werden können. Ein Upgrade auf andere Windows-Versionen ist gegen Aufpreis möglich. Windows 10 S ist als Konkurrenz für Google Chrome OS, vor allem im Bildungsbereich und für kostengünstige Hardware, konzipiert.[30]
Alle Editionen sind jeweils als 32-Bit- und 64-Bit-Version erhältlich sowie als Version ohne „medienrelevante Technologien“ (N- bzw. KN-Versionen).[31]

Kleine Mobilgeräte[Bearbeiten | Quelltext bearbeiten]
Windows 10 Mobile für Smartphones und kleine Tablets (z. B. Phablets)
Windows 10 Mobile Enterprise, mit zusätzlichen Funktionen für Unternehmen
Internet der Dinge[Bearbeiten | Quelltext bearbeiten]
Windows 10 IoT Core Kostenlose Internet der Dinge (IoT) Version für den Raspberry Pi 2/3, MinnowBoard Max und DragonBoard 410c[32]
Windows 10 IoT Core Pro Kommerzielle Internet der Dinge (IoT) Version ("OEM-exklusive SKU") für den Raspberry Pi 2/3, MinnowBoard Max und DragonBoard 410c[32]
Windows 10 IoT Mobile Enterprise[33]
Windows 10 IoT Enterprise[33]
Windows 10 IoT Enterprise LTSB
Verfügbarkeit[Bearbeiten | Quelltext bearbeiten]
Mit Windows 10 schafft Microsoft Windows Phone und Windows RT ab und verwendet auf allen Plattformen den einheitlichen Namen „Windows 10“. Windows 10 wird als Update auf aktuellen Windows-Phone-Smartphones angeboten. Für Geräte mit Windows RT gibt es allerdings keine Umstiegsmöglichkeit auf Windows 10.[34]

Die Windows Technical Preview war seit Anfang Oktober 2014 als 32- und 64-Bit-Version zunächst in den Sprachen Englisch (USA), Englisch (UK), Chinesisch und Portugiesisch (BR) zum Herunterladen (rund 4 GB) verfügbar.[35][36] Die automatische Update-Funktion war für die Preview-Versionen nicht deaktivierbar, und Microsoft behielt sich eine Erfassung von Nutzungsdaten in der Vorabversion vor.[37]

Im November 2014 hatte Microsoft die Versionsnummer des Kernels intern von 6.4 auf 10.0 erhöht und kündigte deren Übernahme in die nächste Veröffentlichung an.[38]

Seit Ende Januar 2015 (Build 9926) waren neben der deutschen Version über 20 weitere Sprachen als ISO-Image zum Herunterladen nach einer Registrierung im Rahmen des Windows Insider Program oder auf entsprechenden Kanälen wie MSDN oder TechNet verfügbar.[39] Als Paket zum Herunterladen wurde die deutschsprachige Preview-Version sowohl als 32-Bit- (≈ 3 GB) als auch als 64-Bit-Version (≈ 4 GB) bereitgestellt.

Seit Ende April 2015 (Build 10074) hießen die Vorabversionen Windows Insider Preview.[40]

Ab 29. Juli 2015 wurde die fertige Version verteilt (Build 10240), wobei diese mit dem bereits am 15. Juli[41] verteilten Insider-Preview-Build mit derselben Build-Nummer identisch ist. Somit nutzten die etwa fünf Millionen Teilnehmer des Windows-Insider-Programms die fertige Version bereits vor dem Tag der Veröffentlichung („release day“). Windows-Benutzer, die ein Upgrade, d. h. einen Umstieg auf eine neuere Betriebssystemversion, reserviert hatten, erhielten Windows 10 in mehreren Schritten in den folgenden Tagen und Wochen.[42]

Systemanforderungen[Bearbeiten | Quelltext bearbeiten]
Windows 10 hat grundsätzlich ähnliche Anforderungen an die Hardware wie die Vorgängerversionen Windows 7 oder Windows 8(.1).[43][44][45] Im Gegensatz zu Windows 8 wird zum Starten von Apps keine Mindest-Bildschirmauflösung von 1024 × 768 Pixeln benötigt.[44]

Hardware-Mindestanforderungen für Windows 10
Komponente	x86-Architektur
32-Bit-Version	64-Bit-Version
Prozessor	1-GHz-Prozessor oder -SoC (IA-32) mit PAE, NX und SSE2[46]	zusätzlich 64-Bit-Modus und Unterstützung der Maschinenbefehle CMPXCHG16b, PrefetchW und LAHF/SAHF.[47]
Arbeitsspeicher	1 GB (bis Version 1511 oder bei Update)[48]
2 GB (ab Version 1607 bei Neugeräten)[49]	2 GB
Grafikkarte	DirectX 9+ mit WDDM 1.0 Treiber
Display	Auflösung von 800 × 600 Pixeln
benötigter freier Speicherplatz	16 GB	20 GB
Es gibt jedoch einige Einschränkungen, gerade bei älteren Computern. Beispielsweise werden energiesparende, aber auch leistungsschwache Computer von ca. 2012/2013, meist Tablets, die einen Atom-Prozessor der Clover-Trail-Plattform von Intel verwenden (Atom Z26xx-Serie) seit Windows 1703 „Creators Update“ nicht mehr unterstützt. Microsoft sichert in diesen Fällen jedoch die Unterstützung von Windows 10 1607 „Anniversary Update“ bis Januar 2023 zu, so wie es die entsprechenden Geräte mit dem vorinstallierten Windows 8.1 auch gehabt hätten.[50]

Support und Aktualisierungen[Bearbeiten | Quelltext bearbeiten]
Für alle Windows-10-Varianten läuft der Mainstream Support (für Privat- bzw. Endkunden) bis 13. Oktober 2020, der Extended Support (für Geschäfts- und Großkunden) ist bis 14. Oktober 2025 geplant; diese Daten gelten jedoch explizit für die im Juli 2015 veröffentlichten Ausgaben. Die Inanspruchnahme setzt voraus, dass bis dahin alle vorherigen Sicherheitsaktualisierungen installiert wurden.[51]

Microsoft veröffentlicht kontinuierlich Systemaktualisierungen („updates“), mit denen Fehler behoben und neue Funktionen ergänzt werden (Rolling Release). Zusätzlich erscheinen regelmäßig kumulative Pakete, die die Windowsplattform mit allen nach den Releases erschienenen Einzelupdates aktualisieren und sie um Funktionen aus den „Insider Builds“ ergänzen.

Seit Build 10586 vom 12. November 2015 wird als Versionsnummer eine vierstellige Zahl, bestehend aus den zwei letzten Stellen der Jahreszahl und dem zweistelligen Monat, verwendet. Build 10586 ist somit Windows 10 1511, was für 2015, Monat 11, also November, steht.[52]

Versionsgeschichte[Bearbeiten | Quelltext bearbeiten]
Version	Build	Name
(Codename)	Erscheinungsdatum
(Supportende)	Bemerkungen und wichtige Änderungen
1507	10240	RTM
(Threshold 1)	29. Juli 2015
(9. Mai 2017)[53]	Erste RTM-Version von Windows 10. Nach Meinung einiger Autoren der Fachpresse ist Windows mit diesem Build allerdings noch nicht ganz fertig.[54][55] Um Windows 10 gratis aktivieren zu können, musste man aus einem bereits aktivierten Windows 7 oder 8/8.1 heraus ein Upgrade durchführen. Der Support für die RTM Version wurde am 9. Mai 2017 eingestellt.
1511	10586	November Update (Threshold 2)	12. November 2015
(10. Oktober 2017)[56]	Hauptsächlich Detailverbesserungen, wie vereinheitlichte Optik vieler weiterer Kontextmenüs. Erstmals konnte man Windows 10 bei einer Neuinstallation innerhalb des von Microsoft angegebenen Zeitraums direkt mit einem Produktschlüssel von Windows 7 oder 8/8.1 gratis aktivieren.[57]
1607	14393	Anniversary Update (Redstone 1)	2. August 2016	Das „Anniversary Update“ für Windows 10 beinhaltet unter anderem die folgenden Neuerungen und Änderungen:[58][59]
Verbesserte Unterstützung von Eingabestiften mit Windows Ink.
Überarbeitetes Startmenü.
Cortana versteht mehr Befehle, ist tiefer im System integriert und funktioniert auch auf gesperrtem Bildschirm.
Edge Browser unterstützt Erweiterungen und das Anheften von Tabs.
Windows Defender mit „Offline“-Modus, der ausgeführt werden kann, noch bevor das Betriebssystem geladen wird.
Einige Gruppenrichtlinienobjekte verlieren unter Windows 10 Pro ihre Wirkung.[60]
Das Windows Subsystem for Linux, eine Kompatibilitätsschicht zum Ausführen von Linux-Programmdateien. Dies ist vor allem für Software-Entwickler gedacht und kann ab dieser Version als experimentelle Funktion aktiviert werden.[61]
In der 32-Bit-Version sind die Systemanforderungen bei Neugeräten von 1 auf 2 GB Arbeitsspeicher gestiegen.[49]
1 Die Build-Nummern von Desktop- und Mobil-Version wurden zwischenzeitlich angeglichen, dadurch gab es einen größeren Sprung bei der Build-Nummer.[62]
1703	15063	Creators Update (Redstone 2)	6. April 2017	Das „Creators Update“ wurde am 6. April zur manuellen Installation veröffentlicht. Die Verteilung per Windows Update startete am 11. April. Die Aktualisierung enthält unter zahlreichen Detailverbesserungen insbesondere die folgenden Änderungen und Neuerungen:[63][64]
Die Datenschutzoptionen sind ausführlicher und transparenter erklärt.
Paint 3D ermöglicht es, einfache dreidimensionale Zeichnungen anzufertigen.
Der Nachtmodus ändert die Farbtemperatur der Bildschirmausgabe abhängig von der Tageszeit.
Ein Spielmodus soll die Leistung in Computerspielen durch Freigabe von Ressourcen verbessern.
Verbesserte Darstellung älterer Anwendungen bei der Bildschirmskalierung.
1709	16299	Fall Creators Update (Redstone 3)	17. Oktober 2017	Die am 17. Oktober 2017 erschienene Aktualisierung beinhaltet folgende Neuerungen:[65]
OneDrive-Funktion "Dateien bei Bedarf": In der Cloud gespeicherte Dateien werden nur bei Bedarf heruntergeladen
Überwachter Ordnerzugriff: Nur Programme, denen die entsprechende Erlaubnis erteilt wurde, dürfen in persönliche Ordnern schreiben
Microsoft Edge kann Inhaltsverzeichnisse von PDF-Dateien anzeigen und Formulardaten ausfüllen
-	-	(Redstone 4)	Frühjahr 2018	Die nächste große Aktualisierung für Windows 10, die im Frühling 2018 erscheinen soll.[66]
Legende:Ältere Version; nicht mehr unterstütztÄltere Version; noch unterstütztAktuelle VersionZukünftige Version
Namensgebung[Bearbeiten | Quelltext bearbeiten]
Windows 10 folgt auf Windows 8.1 und wurde zunächst in vielen Artikeln und auch von Microsoft-Verantwortlichen als Windows 9 bezeichnet.[67] Laut Microsofts Marketing-Chef Tony Prophet wurde der Name Windows 9 übersprungen, um damit deutlich zu machen, dass die Änderung „keinen stufenweisen Schritt gegenüber Windows 8.1 [darstelle, sondern] ein grundlegender Schritt“ sei.[68] Andere Quellen sagen, dass Windows 9 übersprungen wurde, da ältere Software beim Auslesen des Betriebssystems Windows 9 als Windows 95 deuten könnte.

Die Namen des neuen Browsers Edge und der Sprachassistentin Cortana sowie der Arbeitstitel von Windows 10 „Threshold“ sind auf die Spieleserie Halo zurückzuführen.[69] Der Codename „Redstone“ für die zweite Hauptversion von Windows 10 geht auf das Spiel Minecraft zurück.

Kontroversen und Kritik[Bearbeiten | Quelltext bearbeiten]
Datenschutz[Bearbeiten | Quelltext bearbeiten]
Für heftige Kritik sorgte die im Vergleich zu den Vorgängerbetriebssystemen ausgeweitete Übertragung von Daten an Microsoft. Das Unternehmen orientiere sich am Umfang der Datenerhebung an Apple, Facebook und Google.[70] In Anbetracht dessen warnen Verbraucherschützer[71] vor einer umfassenden Ausforschung des Nutzers – die Verbraucherzentrale schreibt, dass sich dadurch der „PC in eine Art private Abhöranlage verwandelt“. Windows 10 übermittle Nutzerdaten wie Name, Alter, Geschlecht, Standort, gekaufte Digitalgüter und teilweise auch aufgerufene Webseiten oder Suchbegriffe an Microsoft, das diese dann auswerte.[72] Das Sammeln von Nutzerdaten könne zum Teil eingeschränkt, nicht aber vollständig deaktiviert werden.[73] Die Übertragung von Diagnose- und Nutzungsdaten lasse sich nicht vollständig abschalten.[74][75]

Der Verbraucherschutzzentrale NRW zufolge sind die Datenschutzbestimmungen unzureichend und würden den Nutzer nicht hinreichend über die Verwendung der erhobenen Daten informieren.[76] Eine gegensätzliche Ansicht vertritt allerdings die bayerische Datenschutzbehörde. Gegenüber ComputerBase erklärte sie, die Datenschutzbestimmungen seien relativ umfangreich und klar verständlich. Darüber hinaus wird begrüßt, dass der Nutzer viele Optionen erhält, um die Privatsphäre zu schützen. So sei es etwa möglich, die Einstellungen für einzelne Apps separat anzupassen.[77]

Das Bayerische Landesamt für Datenschutzaufsicht hat das Betriebssystem Windows 10 Enterprise (Build 14393) und die zum Zeitpunkt der Untersuchung neueste Version nach dem Creators Update (Build 15063) einer gründlichen Prüfung unterzogen. Im Ergebnis können und dürfen Unternehmen das Betriebssystem in der Enterprise-Variante bedenkenlos datenschutzkonform nutzen, wenn zuvor einige Einstellungen in den Gruppenrichtlinien geändert werden.[78]

Wechsel von Standardprogrammen[Bearbeiten | Quelltext bearbeiten]
Der Browserhersteller Mozilla übt Kritik[79][80] an der Art, wie Windows mit Standardprogrammen umgeht: Egal welchen Browser der Benutzer vor einem Umstieg („upgrade“) auf Windows 10 ausgewählt hatte, legt Windows automatisch den Edge-Browser als neuen Standard fest. Wegen Änderungen an der Benutzeroberfläche müsse der Benutzer, um in Windows 10 ein anderes Standardprogramm festzulegen, verglichen mit Windows 8 außerdem mehr als doppelt so viele Klicks ausführen. Wenn der Benutzer in einer App bestätigt, dass er diese als Standardanwendung nutzen möchte, setzt Windows 10 sie nicht als Standard, sondern öffnet lediglich ein Einstellungsfenster, in dem weiterhin die zuvor ausgewählte Standardanwendung eingestellt ist; der Benutzer muss hierin dann manuell die gewünschte Standardanwendung einstellen. Diese erhöhte Komplexität stehe der Entscheidungsfreiheit im Weg, so Mozillas CEO Chris Beard.

Kontroversen um die geänderte Update-Prozedur[Bearbeiten | Quelltext bearbeiten]
Bis einschließlich Windows 8.1 war es möglich, einzelne Windows-Updates von der Installation auszuschließen (bzw. auf Updates gänzlich zu verzichten). Bei dem für Privatanwender konzipierten Windows 10 Home kann der Benutzer nur noch den Zeitpunkt des Neustarts nach einem Aktualisierungsvorgang festlegen, nicht aber, ob ein Update-Paket überhaupt installiert werden soll oder nicht. Benutzer von Windows 10 Pro können die Installation zwar zeitlich aufschieben, aber nicht verhindern. Dies soll zum einen Sicherheitsrisiken minimieren, aber auch die Kompatibilität von Dritt-Anwendungen erhöhen bzw. die Pflege von Software vereinfachen.[81]

Für diese Änderung wurde Microsoft kritisiert, da es vorkommen kann, dass Updates die ordnungsgemäße Funktion des Computers stören. Zwar können einzelne Updates mit Hilfe eines von Microsoft zur Verfügung gestellten Workarounds ausgeblendet und dadurch an der Installation gehindert werden, in vielen Fällen ist dies jedoch erst nach der einmaligen Installation und anschließenden Deinstallation des betreffenden Updates möglich.[82][83][84] So wurde im August 2015 ein fehlerhaftes Update veröffentlicht, das unter bestimmten Umständen zu einer Installations-Endlosschleife führte, dessen Installation nicht verhindert werden konnte.[84]

Aber auch der damit einhergehende Kontrollverlust wird kritisiert, da die Installation von Funktions-Updates nicht verhindert werden kann, solange eine Internetverbindung besteht. Zukünftige Updates könnten etwa die Bedienbarkeit beeinflussen, ohne dass dem Benutzer die Wahl gelassen wird, diese Änderung zu übernehmen oder nicht.[85] Der Kryptologe Rüdiger Weis zog durch den Zwang zur Installation der Updates sogar Parallelen zu einem Botnetz, da genauso wie bei selbigem „fremde Leute ohne Genehmigung auf meinem System Code ausführen können“.[86]

Im November 2015 kam es erneut zu einer Kontroverse, nachdem bei der Aktualisierung auf Version 1511 automatisch bestimmte Anwendungsprogramme und Gerätetreiber aus Kompatibilitätsgründen deinstalliert und einige Benutzereinstellungen auf den Standardwert zurückgesetzt worden waren, ohne dass dies verhindert werden konnte. Für Kritik sorgte auch der Umstand, dass der Benutzer nicht über die Änderungen am System informiert wurde.[87][88] Auch bestimmte Datenschutzeinstellungen waren anfangs davon betroffen und wurden durch die Installation des Updates wieder auf den Standardwert zurückgesetzt – hierbei handelte es sich jedoch laut Microsoft um einen Fehler, der mittlerweile korrigiert wurde.[89]

Das Update auf Version 1703 entschärfte einige der oben beschriebenen Probleme. Die zuvor gemachten Einstellungen werden während des Updates angezeigt und können geändert werden. Ohne Änderung bleiben sie erhalten. Das Aufschieben von Updates kann nun in der Pro- und Enterprise-Edition einfacher und feiner konfiguriert werden. Microsoft wurde für diese Änderung gelobt, denn dadurch könnten erfahrene Benutzer die Wartbarkeit ihres PCs verbessern.[90] Kritisiert wurde jedoch, dass Nutzer der Home-Edition weiter „wie Beta-Tester behandelt werden“, da diese Aktualisierungen nach wie vor nicht beeinflussen oder aufschieben können.[91]

Aufdringliche Upgrade-Aufforderungen[Bearbeiten | Quelltext bearbeiten]
Immer wieder wurde Microsoft vorgeworfen, aufdringliche Werbeprogramme für den Umstieg auf Windows 10 als Update der vorhandenen Systeme Windows 7 und 8.1 veröffentlicht zu haben, welche aufgrund ungenauer Beschreibungen mitunter ungewollt auf dem Rechner installiert worden waren.[92][93][94] Zusätzlich wurden durch die installierten Werbeprogramme die Installationsdateien für Windows 10 ungefragt heruntergeladen[93] (in der Presse vielfach als „Zwangsdownload“ aufgegriffen), was zu einer Abmahnung von Verbraucherschützern führte, die dies als „unzumutbare Belästigung“ eingestuft hatten.[95][96]

Ab Anfang 2016 wurde Windows 10 als „empfohlenes Update“ für die Vorgängersysteme eingestuft, wodurch Windows 10 auf manchen Systemen ungefragt zur automatischen Installation vorgemerkt wurde.[97] Im Mai 2016 kam es diesbezüglich zu einer Kontroverse, weil Microsoft das Wegklicken eines zuvor erscheinenden Hinweisfensters per „Schließen“-Button als implizite Zustimmung wertete. Infolgedessen wurde Windows 10 ohne explizite Einwilligung des Anwenders kurze Zeit später automatisch installiert.[98] Um die automatische Installation zu verhindern, musste ein Link innerhalb des Hinweisfensters angeklickt werden, der leicht zu übersehen gewesen sei.[97] Microsoft wurde diesbezüglich vorgeworfen, auf aggressive Weise den Erfolg von Windows 10 erzwingen zu wollen.[99] Eine Nutzerin aus Kalifornien, der nach eigenen Angaben Windows 10 ohne ihre Zustimmung installiert wurde, hat Microsoft deswegen verklagt. Der Konzern zahlte ihr in einer außergerichtlichen Einigung 10.000 Dollar Einkommenseinbußen. Dies wurde seitens der Fachpresse als indirektes Eingeständnis von Microsoft interpretiert, dabei zu weit gegangen zu sein, den „Schließen“-Button als Zustimmung zu werten.[100]

Literatur[Bearbeiten | Quelltext bearbeiten]
Inge Baumeister, Anja Schmid, Andreas Zintzsch: Windows 10. Richtig nutzen von Anfang an! Bildner, Passau 2015, ISBN 978-3-8328-0118-2.
Mareile Heiting: Windows 10. Der verständliche Einstieg. Vierfarben, Bonn 2015, ISBN 978-3-8421-0161-6.
Christian Immler: Das große Franzis Handbuch für Windows 10. Franzis, Haar bei München 2015, ISBN 978-3-645-60422-2.
Weblinks[Bearbeiten | Quelltext bearbeiten]
 Commons: Microsoft Windows 10 – Sammlung von Bildern, Videos und Audiodateien
Website von Windows 10
Windows 10-Updateverlauf
Gerald Himmelein: Windows 10 für Spätentschlossene – c't Magazin. In: heise.de. 23. Juli 2016, abgerufen am 25. Juli 2016. – Ausführliche Datenschutzanleitung
Der Landesbeauftragte für den Datenschutz in Baden-Württemberg: Datenschutzeinstellungen bei Windows 10 – Wie Sie Windows 10 datenschutzfreundlich nutzen können. In: baden-wuerttemberg.datenschutz.de. Mai 2016, abgerufen am 21. Dezember 2016 (PDF).
Bundesamt für die Sicherheit in der Informationstechnik (BSI): Client unter Windows 10. In: bsi.bund.de. 23. Mai 2016, abgerufen am 21. Dezember 2016. – IT-Grundschutz Windows 10 des BSI
Einzelnachweise[Bearbeiten | Quelltext bearbeiten]

Windows OS, computer operating system (OS) developed by Microsoft Corporation to run personal computers (PCs). Featuring the first graphical user interface (GUI) for IBM-compatible PCs, the Windows OS soon dominated the PC market. Approximately 90 percent of PCs run some version of Windows.

The first version of Windows, released in 1985, was simply a GUI offered as an extension of Microsoft’s existing disk operating system, or MS-DOS. Based in part on licensed concepts that Apple Inc. had used for its Macintosh System Software, Windows for the first time allowed DOS users to visually navigate a virtual desktop, opening graphical “windows” displaying the contents of electronic folders and files with the click of a mouse button, rather than typing commands and directory paths at a text prompt.

Subsequent versions introduced greater functionality, including native Windows File Manager, Program Manager, and Print Manager programs, and a more dynamic interface. Microsoft also developed specialized Windows packages, including the networkable Windows for Workgroups and the high-powered Windows NT, aimed at businesses. The 1995 consumer release Windows 95 fully integrated Windows and DOS and offered built-in Internet support, including the World Wide Web browser Internet Explorer.

With the 2001 release of Windows XP, Microsoft united its various Windows packages under a single banner, offering multiple editions for consumers, businesses, multimedia developers, and others. Windows XP abandoned the long-used Windows 95 kernel (core software code) for a more powerful code base and offered a more practical interface and improved application and memory management. The highly successful XP standard was succeeded in late 2006 by Windows Vista, which experienced a troubled rollout and met with considerable marketplace resistance, quickly acquiring a reputation for being a large, slow, and resource-consuming system. Responding to Vista’s disappointing adoption rate, Microsoft in 2009 released Windows 7, an OS whose interface was similar to that of Vista but was met with enthusiasm for its noticeable speed improvement and its modest system requirements.

Windows 8 in 2012 offered a start screen with applications appearing as tiles on a grid and the ability to synchronize settings so users could log on to another Windows 8 machine and use their preferred settings. In 2015 Microsoft released Windows 10, which came with Cortana, a digital personal assistant like Apple’s Siri, and the Web browser Microsoft Edge, which replaced Internet Explorer. Microsoft also announced that Windows 10 would be the last version of Windows, meaning that users would receive regular updates to the OS but that no more large-scale revisions would be done.
Windows 10 Mobile is a mobile operating system developed by Microsoft. It is an iteration of the Windows Phone product line and a successor to Windows Phone 8.1,[6] and is an edition of Windows 10, Microsoft's operating system for personal computers, as part of Microsoft's plans to unify Windows' application platform across multiple device classes.[7]

Windows 10 Mobile aims to provide greater consistency with its counterpart for personal computers, including more extensive synchronization of content, a new universal application platform that allows one app to run on multiple Windows 10 devices such as PCs, mobile devices and Xbox, as well as the capability, on supported hardware, to connect devices to an external display and use a "PC-like" interface with mouse and keyboard input support. Microsoft has built tools for developers to easily port some iOS apps with minimal modifications. Windows Phone 8.1 smartphones are eligible for upgrade to Windows 10 Mobile, pursuant to manufacturer and carrier support.[8] Some features may vary depending on hardware compatibility.[9]

Windows 10 Mobile is designed for use on smartphones and phablets running on ARM processor architectures.[4] Windows 10 Mobile entered public beta for selected Lumia brand smartphones on February 12, 2015.[10] The first Lumia smartphones powered by Windows 10 Mobile were released on November 20, 2015 while eligible Windows Phone devices began receiving updates to Windows 10 Mobile on March 17, 2016, pursuant to manufacturer and carrier support.

In October 2017, it was revealed that Microsoft had discontinued active development of Windows 10 Mobile due to its low market share and the lack of third-party development for the platform, and that the operating system will only receive patches and maintenance releases going forward.

Contents  [hide]
1	Development
1.1	Project Astoria
1.2	Naming
2	Features
3	Release
3.1	Upgrade release
4	Reception
4.1	Sales
5	Devices
6	Version history
6.1	Threshold
6.2	Anniversary Update
6.3	Creators Update
6.4	Fall Creators update
7	References
Development[edit]
Microsoft had already begun the process of unifying the Windows platform across device classes in 2012; Windows Phone 8 dropped the Windows CE-based architecture of its predecessor, Windows Phone 7,[11] for a platform built upon the NT kernel that shared much of the same architecture with its PC counterpart Windows 8 including file system (NTFS), networking stack, security elements, graphics engine (DirectX), device driver framework and hardware abstraction layer.[12][13] At Build 2014, Microsoft also unveiled the concept of Universal Windows Apps. With the addition of Windows Runtime support to these platforms, apps created for Windows 8.1 could now be ported to Windows Phone 8.1 and Xbox One while sharing a common codebase with their PC counterparts. User data and licenses for an app could also be shared between multiple platforms.[14]

In July 2014, Microsoft's then-new CEO Satya Nadella explained that the company was planning to "streamline the next version of Windows from three operating systems into one single converged operating system for screens of all sizes," unifying Windows, Windows Phone, and Windows Embedded around a common architecture and a unified application ecosystem. However, Nadella stated that these internal changes would not have any effect on how the operating systems are marketed and sold.[15][16]

On September 30, 2014, Microsoft unveiled Windows 10; Terry Myerson explained that Windows 10 would be Microsoft's "most comprehensive platform ever," promoting plans to provide a "unified" platform for desktop computers, laptops, tablets, smartphones, and all-in-one devices.[17][18] Windows 10 on phones was publicly unveiled during the Windows 10: The Next Chapter press event on January 21, 2015; unlike previous Windows Phone versions, it would also expand the platform's focus to small, ARM-based tablets. Microsoft's previous attempt at an operating system for ARM-based tablets, Windows RT (which was based upon the PC version of Windows 8) was commercially unsuccessful.[19]

During the 2015 Build keynote, Microsoft announced the middleware toolkit "Islandwood", later known as Windows Bridge for iOS, which provides a toolchain that can assist developers in porting Objective-C software (primarily iOS projects) to build as Universal Windows Apps.[20][21] An early build of Windows Bridge for iOS was released as open source software under the MIT License on August 6, 2015.[21][22] Visual Studio 2015 can also convert Xcode projects into Visual Studio projects.[21][23][24] Microsoft also announced plans for a toolkit codenamed "Centennial",[25] which would allow desktop Windows software using Win32 APIs to be ported to Windows 10 Mobile.[26]

Project Astoria[edit]
At Build, Microsoft had also announced an Android runtime environment for Windows 10 Mobile known as "Astoria", which would allow Android apps to run in an emulated environment with minimal changes, and have access to Microsoft platform APIs such as Bing Maps and Xbox Live as nearly drop-in replacements for equivalent Google Mobile Services. Google Mobile Services and certain core APIs would not be available, and apps with "deep integration into background tasks" were said to poorly support the environment.[27][28]

On February 25, 2016, after already having delayed it in November 2015,[26][29] Microsoft announced that "Astoria" would be shelved. Microsoft argued that an Android emulator was ultimately redundant to the native, Objective-C toolchain, because iOS was already a primary target in multi-platform mobile development. The company also encouraged use of products from Xamarin (which they had acquired the previous day) for multi-platform app development using C# programming language instead.[25][30] The Windows Subsystem for Linux (that isn't available in the Mobile version) was developed from Project Astoria.[31]

Naming[edit]
In accordance with Microsoft's branding strategy, this operating system will be branded primarily as an edition of Windows 10, rather than "Windows Phone 10". Microsoft had begun to phase out specific references to the Windows Phone brand in its advertising in mid-2014, but critics have still considered the operating system to be an iteration and continuation of Windows Phone due to its lineage and similar overall functionality. Microsoft referred to the OS as "Windows 10 for phones and small tablets" during its unveiling,[32] leaked screenshots from a Technical Preview build identified the operating system as "Windows 10 Mobile"[33][34][35][36] and the technical preview was officially called the "Windows 10 Technical Preview for phones".[37] Internally, the Microsoft Edge user agent on Windows 10 Mobile still contains a reference to "Windows Phone 10".[38]

On May 13, 2015, Microsoft officially confirmed the platform would be known as Windows 10 Mobile.[6][39]

Features[edit]
A major aspect of Windows 10 Mobile is a focus on harmonizing user experiences and functionality between different classes of devices—specifically, devices running the PC-oriented version of Windows 10. Under the Universal Windows Platform concept, Windows Runtime apps for Windows 10 on PC can be ported to other platforms in the Windows 10 family with nearly the same codebase, but with adaptations for specific device classes. Windows 10 Mobile also shares user interface elements with its PC counterpart, such as the updated Action Center and settings menu.[14][19][32][33][40] During its initial unveiling, Microsoft presented several examples of Windows apps that would have similar functionality and user interfaces between Windows 10 on desktops and mobile devices, including updated Photos and Maps apps, and new Microsoft Office apps.[41][42][43] Although marketed as a converged platform, and as with Windows Phone 8, using a Windows NT-based kernel, Windows 10 Mobile still cannot run Win32 desktop applications, but is compatible with software designed for Windows Phone 8.[44]

Notifications can be synced between devices; dismissing a notification on, for example, a laptop, will also dismiss it from a phone. Certain types of notifications now allow inline replies. The start screen now has the option to display wallpapers as a background of the screen behind translucent tiles, rather than within the tiles.[45] The messaging app adds support for internet-based Skype messaging alongside SMS, similarly to iMessage, and can synchronize these conversations with other devices.[34][46] The camera app has been updated to match the "Lumia Camera" app previously exclusive to Lumia products,[46] and a new Photos app aggregates content from local storage and OneDrive, and can perform automatic enhancements to photos.[46] The on-screen keyboard now contains a virtual pointing stick for manipulating the text editing cursor, a dedicated voice input button, and can be shifted towards the left or right of the screen to improve one-handed usability on larger devices.[33][46][47]

Windows 10 Mobile supports "Continuum", a feature that allows supported devices to connect to an external display, and scale its user interface and apps into a "PC-like" desktop interface with support for mouse and keyboard input over USB or Bluetooth.[48][49] Devices can connect directly to external displays wirelessly using Miracast,[50] via USB-C, or via docking station accessories with USB ports, as well as HDMI and DisplayPort outputs.[51]

A new iteration of the Office Mobile suite, Office for Windows 10, is also bundled. Based upon the Android and iOS versions of Office Mobile, they introduce a new user interface with a variation of the ribbon toolbar used by the desktop version, and a new mobile version of Outlook. Outlook utilizes the same rendering engine as the Windows desktop version of Microsoft Word.[40][41][52] Microsoft Edge replaces Internet Explorer Mobile as the default web browser.[53]

Release[edit]
Windows 10 Mobile's first-party launch devices—the Lumia 950, Lumia 950 XL, and Lumia 550—were released in November 2015 being the first phones to ship with Windows 10 Mobile.[54][55] Monthly updates to the OS software are being released to address bugs and security issues. These updates are distributed to all Windows 10 Mobile devices and do not require the intervention of a user's wireless carrier in order to authorize their distribution. Firmware upgrades will still require authorization by the user's carrier.[56]

The Windows Insider program, adopted to provide a public beta for the PC version of Windows 10,[57] is used to provide a public beta version of Windows 10 Mobile for selected devices.[58] A build released on April 10, 2015 was to support most second and third generation Lumia products, but the Lumia 930, Lumia Icon, and Lumia 640 XL did not receive the update due to scaling bugs, and delivery was suspended as a whole due to backup and restore issues on some models.[59][60] An update to the Windows Phone Recovery Tool resolved these concerns,[61] and delivery of Windows 10 updates was restored to the 520 with build 10052, and to the 640 with build 10080.[citation needed]

Build number 10136 was released on June 16, 2015, with a "migration bug" that required that existing devices on build 10080 be reverted to Windows Phone 8.1 using the Recovery Tool before the installation of 10136 could proceed.[62] This migration bug was fixed a week later with the release of build 10149.[63] Mobile builds of the Redstone branch till 14322 were halted for the device Lumia 635 (1 GB RAM) due to bugs.[3]

Upgrade release[edit]
Some Windows Phone 8.1 smartphones can be upgraded to Windows 10, pursuant to hardware compatibility, manufacturer support, and carrier support. Not all phones can receive the update nor support all of its features.[8][58] Microsoft originally stated that stable upgrades for Windows Phone 8.1 devices would be released in December 2015; however, the release was ultimately delayed to March 17, 2016.[64][65] Among first-party devices, only the Lumia 430, 435, 532, 535, 540, 635 (1 GB RAM), 640, 640 XL, 735, 830, 929, 930 and 1520 are supported. The only third-party devices supported are the BLU Products Win HD w510u and Win HD LTE x150q, and the MCJ Madosma Q501. Windows 10 Mobile does not officially support any HTC devices (HTC One M8 for Windows, HTC Windows Phone 8X, HTC Windows Phone 8S), although the HTC One M8 for Windows could be upgraded to the public release version of Windows 10 Mobile through the Windows Insider program. While Microsoft stated that the Nokia Lumia Icon may be upgraded at a later date, the company stated that there will not be a second wave of officially-supported devices. Microsoft also removed statements which promoted the BLU Win JR LTE as being compatible with Windows 10.[66][67][68]

Microsoft originally stated that all Lumia smartphones running Windows Phone 8 and 8.1 would receive updates to 10, but Microsoft later reiterated that only devices with the "Lumia Denim" firmware revision and at least 8 GB of internal storage would receive the upgrade.[47][55] In February 2015, Joe Belfiore stated that Microsoft was working on support for devices with 512 MB of RAM, (such as the popular Nokia Lumia 520),[58] but these plans have since been dropped.[69] Upon the official upgrade release, some Lumia models, particularly the Lumia 1020 and 1320, were excluded despite meeting the previously announced criteria. Microsoft cited poor user feedback on the performance of preview builds on these models as reasoning.[70] On 17th October 2017, Nearly 2 years after the Windows 10 release, Microsoft released an Over-The-Cable (OTC) Updater tool to bring all Lumias up to date to the latest supported Windows 10 build, even older 512mb and 1gb ram unlocked devices such as the 520,620,720,925,920 etc which were updated using the tool to Build 10586 (November Update). [71]

Reception[edit]
Reception of Windows 10 Mobile has been mixed. The Verge was disappointed with the direction that Windows 10 Mobile has taken, describing it as feeling "buggy and unfinished".[72] Tech Radar praised the OS for its design, but noted that the lack of apps was the "biggest let-down on Windows Phone and Windows 10 Mobile alike."[73]

Windows 10 Mobile has also been criticized for its poorer performance than Windows Phone 8.1 on some devices. After many user complaints, Microsoft started allowing users to downgrade from Windows 10 to Windows Phone 8.1.[74]

Sales[edit]
Sales have decreased rapidly since its release,[75] to the point of Windows 10 Mobile being considered irrelevant in the mobile operating system landscape.[76]

Devices[edit]
See also: List of Windows 10 Mobile devices
As with Windows Phone, Windows 10 Mobile supports ARM system-on-chips from Qualcomm's Snapdragon line. In March 2015, Ars Technica reported that the operating system will also introduce support for IA-32 system-on-chips from Intel and AMD, including Intel's Atom x3 and Cherry Trail Atom x5 and x7, and AMD's Carrizo.[77] However, as of November 2016, it did not happen.[4][78]

Minimum specifications for Windows 10 Mobile devices are similar to those of Windows Phone 8, with a minimum screen resolution of 800×480 (854×480 if software buttons are in use), 1 GB of RAM and 8 GB of internal storage.[4] Owing to hardware advancements and the operating system's support for tablets, screen resolutions can now reach as high as QSXGA resolution (2560×2048) and further, as opposed to the 1080p cap of Windows Phone 8. The minimum amount of RAM required is dictated by the screen's resolution; screens with a resolution 800×480 or 960×540 and higher require 1 GB, 1920×1080 (FHD) or 1440×900 and higher require 2 GB, and 2560×1440 and higher require 3 GB.[4]

Microsoft unveiled flagship Microsoft Lumia smartphones during a media event on October 6, 2015, including Lumia 950, Lumia 950 XL, and the low-end Lumia 550.[54]

Version history[edit]
See also: Windows Phone version history and Windows 10 version history § Mobile version history
Threshold[edit]
Microsoft announced Windows 10 Mobile during their January 21, 2015 event "The Next Chapter". The first Windows 10 Mobile build was rolled out on February 12, 2015 as part of the Windows Insider Program to a subset of mobile devices running Windows Phone 8 and 8.1. As with the desktop editions of Windows 10, this initial release was codenamed "Threshold", it was part of both the "Threshold 1" and "Threshold 2" development cycles.[79][80] Windows 10 Mobile launched with the Microsoft Lumia 550, 950 and 950 XL. The rollout for Windows Phone 8.1 devices started March 17, 2016.[81]

Anniversary Update[edit]
On February 19, 2016, Microsoft restarted the rollout of full builds for the first feature update, officially known as the "Anniversary Update" or "Version 1607",[82] codenamed "Redstone 1". Like the start of the previous wave, the first builds were not available to all devices that were included in the Windows Insider Program.[83][84]

Creators Update[edit]
The Creators Update (named after the equivalent update to Windows 10 for PC), also known as Redstone 2, was first previewed on the Insider branch on August 17, 2016.[85] and began deployment on April 25, 2017. It features mainly minor feature additions, including an e-book reader within Edge, the ability to turn off the phone screen when using Continuum mode on an external display, SMS support in Skype, SD card encryption, and other changes. Despite the platform's synergy with Windows 10 for PCs, some of its features (such as Night Light and Paint 3D) were excluded.[86][87] Only eleven existing Windows 10 Mobile devices were offered upgrades.[88]

Alcatel IDOL 4S
Alcatel OneTouch Fierce XL
HP Elite x3
Lenovo Softbank 503LV
MCJ Madosma Q601
Microsoft Lumia 550
Microsoft Lumia 640 / 640XL
Microsoft Lumia 650
Microsoft Lumia 950 / 950 XL
Trinity NuAns Neo
VAIO VPB051
Fall Creators update[edit]
Around the time that the Creators Update was finalized, Windows Insider users began to be issued builds on a branch known as "feature2". Feature 2 is a separate branch from the main Redstone 3-branch (branded as "Fall Creators Update") for Insiders, the branch corresponding to the next feature update. Microsoft stated that there were no plans to move Windows 10 Mobile to be in sync with the other Windows 10-platforms just yet; media outlets considered this decision to be a sign that Microsoft was beginning to wind down active development of Windows 10 Mobile beyond maintenance releases, as development was no longer directly in sync with the PC version.[89][90]

In early-June 2017, a private build, briefly deployed by accident by Microsoft, revealed work on an updated interface for Windows 10 Mobile known as "CShell" ("composable shell"). CShell is an effort to further unify the implementation of the Windows shell across device classes using a modular system; the build featured a Start screen, Action Center, and Continuum desktop interface that were nearly identical in functionality and appearance to their equivalents on Windows 10 for PC. However, this iteration of the operating system was no longer backwards compatible with Windows Phone Silverlight apps.[91][92][93]

On October 8, 2017, Microsoft executive Joe Belfiore revealed that the company would no longer actively develop new features or hardware for Windows phones, citing its low market share, and the resultant lack of third-party software for the platform. Microsoft had largely abandoned its mobile business, having laid off the majority of Microsoft Mobile employees in 2016,[94] and having focused software efforts on providing apps and services compatible with Android and iOS instead. Development of Windows 10 Mobile will be limited to maintenance releases and patches.[95][96][97]

Windows Phone 8 is the second generation of the Windows Phone mobile operating system from Microsoft. It was released on October 29, 2012, and like its predecessor, it features a flat user interface based on Metro design language. It was succeeded by Windows Phone 8.1, which was unveiled on April 2, 2014.[3][4]

Windows Phone 8 replaces the Windows CE-based architecture used in Windows Phone 7 with the Windows NT kernel found in Windows 8. Current Windows Phone 7 devices cannot run or update to Windows Phone 8 and new applications compiled specifically for Windows Phone 8 are not made available for Windows Phone 7 devices. Developers can make their apps available on both Windows Phone 7 and Windows Phone 8 devices by targeting both platforms via the proper SDKs in Visual Studio [5]

Windows Phone 8 devices are manufactured by Microsoft Mobile (formerly Nokia), HTC, Samsung and Huawei.[6]

Contents  [hide]
1	History
1.1	Support
2	Features
2.1	Core
2.2	Web
2.3	Multitasking
2.4	Kids Corner
2.5	Rooms
2.6	Driving Mode
2.7	Data Sense
2.8	NFC and Wallet
2.9	Syncing
2.10	Other features
3	Hardware specifications
4	Version history
5	Reception
5.1	Usage
6	See also
7	References
8	External links
History[edit]
On June 20, 2012, Microsoft unveiled Windows Phone 8 (codenamed Apollo), a third generation of the Windows Phone operating system for release later in 2012. Windows Phone 8 replaces its previously Windows CE-based architecture with one based on the Windows NT kernel, and shares many components with Windows 8, allowing developers to easily port applications between the two platforms.

Windows Phone 8 also allows devices with larger screens (the four confirmed sizes are "WVGA 800×480 15:9","WXGA 1280×768 15:9","720p 1280×720 16:9","1080p 1920x1080 16:9" resolutions) and multi-core processors, NFC (that can primarily be used to share content and perform payments), backwards compatibility with Windows Phone 7 apps, improved support for removable storage (that now functions more similarly to how such storage is handled on Windows and Android), a redesigned home screen incorporating resizable tiles across the entire screen, a new Wallet hub (to integrate NFC payments, coupon websites such as Groupon, and loyalty cards), and "first-class" integration of VoIP applications into the core functions of the OS. Additionally, Windows Phone 8 will include more features aimed at the enterprise market, such as device management, BitLocker encryption, and the ability to create a private Marketplace to distribute apps to employees[7][8]—features expected to meet or exceed the enterprise capabilities of the previous Windows Mobile platform.[9] Additionally, Windows Phone 8 will support over-the-air updates, and all Windows Phone 8 devices will receive software support for at least 36 months after their release.[10]

In the interest of ensuring it is released with devices designed to take advantage of its new features,[11] Windows Phone 8 will not be made available as an update for existing Windows Phone 7 devices. Instead, Microsoft released Windows Phone 7.8 as an update for Windows Phone 7 devices, which backported several features such as the redesigned home screen.

Addressing some software bugs with Windows Phone 8 forced Microsoft to delay some enterprise improvements, like VPN support, until the 2014 release of Windows Phone 8.1.[12]

Support[edit]
In March 2013, Microsoft announced that updates for the Windows Phone 8 operating system would be made available through July 8, 2014. Microsoft pushed support up to 36 months, announcing that updates for the Windows Phone 8 operating system would be made available through January 12, 2016.[13] Windows Phone 8 devices will be upgradeable to the next edition of Windows Phone 8.1.[14]

Features[edit]
The following features were confirmed at Microsoft's 'sneak peek' at Windows Phone on June 20, 2012 and the unveiling of Windows Phone 8 on October 29, 2012:[15][16][17]

Core[edit]
Windows Phone 8 is the first mobile OS from Microsoft to use the Windows NT kernel, which is the same kernel that runs Windows 8. The operating system adds improved file system, drivers, network stack, security components, media and graphics support. Using the NT kernel, Windows Phone can now support multi-core CPUs of up to 64 cores, as well as 1280×720 and 1280×768 resolutions, in addition to the base 800×480 resolution already available on Windows Phone 7. Furthermore, Windows Phone 8 also adds support for MicroSD cards, which are commonly used to add extra storage to phones. Support for 1080p screens was added in October 2013 with the GDR3 update.

Due to the switch to the NT kernel, Windows Phone 8 also supports native 128-bit Bitlocker encryption and Secure Boot. Windows Phone 8 also supports NTFS due to this switch.[18]

Web[edit]
Internet Explorer 10 is the default browser in Windows Phone 8 and carries over key improvements also found in the desktop version. The navigation interface has been simplified down to a single customizable button (defaults to stop / refresh) and the address bar. While users can change the button to a 'Back' button, there is no way to add a 'Forward' button. However, as the browser supports swipe navigation for both forwards and back, this is a minor issue.

Multitasking[edit]
Unlike its predecessor, Windows Phone 8 uses true multitasking, allowing developers to create apps that can run in the background and resume instantly.[19]

A user can switch between "active" tasks by pressing and holding the Back button, but any application listed may be suspended or terminated[20] under certain conditions, such as a network connection being established or battery power running low. An app running in the background may also automatically suspend, if the user has not opened it for a long duration of time.

The user can close applications by opening the multitasking view and pressing the "X" button in the right-hand corner of each application window, a feature that was added in Update 3.[21]

Kids Corner[edit]
Windows Phone 8 adds Kids Corner, which operates as a kind of "guest mode". The user chooses which applications and games appear on the Kids Corner. When Kids Corner is activated, apps and games installed on the device can be played or accessed without touching the data of the main user signed into the Windows Phone.[16]

Rooms[edit]
Rooms is a feature added specifically for group messaging and communication. Using Rooms, users can contact and see Facebook and Twitter updates only from members of the group created. Members of the group can also share instant messages and photos from within the room. These messages will be shared only with the other room members.[16] Microsoft will be removing this feature sometime during March 2015.[22]

Driving Mode[edit]
With the release of Update 3 in late 2013, pairing a Windows Phone 8 device with a car via Bluetooth now automatically activates "Driving Mode", a specialized UI designed for using a mobile device while driving.[23]

Data Sense[edit]
Data Sense allows users to set data usage limits based on their individual plan. Data Sense can restrict background data when the user is near their set limit (a heart icon is used to notify the user when background tasks are being automatically stopped).[24] Although this feature was originally exclusive to Verizon phones in the United States, the GDR2 update released in July 2013 made Data Sense available to all Windows Phone 8 handsets.

NFC and Wallet[edit]
Select Windows Phones running Windows Phone 8 add NFC capability, which allows for data transfer between two Windows Phone devices, or between a Windows Phone device, and a Windows 8 computer or tablet, using a feature called "Tap and Send".

In certain markets, NFC support on Windows Phone 8 can also be used to conduct in-person transactions through credit and debit cards stored on the phone through the Wallet application. Carriers may activate the NFC feature through SIM or integrated phone hardware. Orange will be first carrier to support NFC on Windows Phone 8. Besides NFC support for transactions, Wallet can also be used to store credit cards in order to make Windows Phone Store and other in-app purchases (that is also a new feature), and can be used to store coupons and loyalty cards.[25]

Syncing[edit]
The Windows Phone app succeeds the Zune Software as the sync application to transfer music, videos, other multimedia files and office documents between Windows Phone 8 and a Windows 8/Windows RT computer or tablet. Versions for OS X and Windows Desktop are also available. Windows Phone 7 devices are not compatible with the PC version of the app, but will work with the Mac version. (Zune is still used for syncing Windows Phone 7s with PCs, and thus remains downloadable from the Windows Phone website.)

Due to Windows Phone 8 identifying itself as an MTP device, Windows Media Player and Windows Explorer may be used to transfer music, videos and other multimedia files unlike in Windows Phone 7. Videos transferred to a computer are limited to a maximum size of 4 GB.[26]

Other features[edit]
Xbox SmartGlass allows control of an Xbox 360 and Xbox One with a phone (available for Windows Phone, iOS and Android).
Xbox Music+Video services support playback of audio and video files in Windows Phone, as well as music purchases. Video purchases were made available with the release of a standalone version of Xbox Video in late 2013 that can be downloaded from the Windows Phone Store.
Native code support (C++)
toast notifications sent by apps and app developers using the Microsoft Push Notification Service.
Simplified porting of Windows 8 apps to Windows Phone 8 (compatibility with Windows 8 "Modern UI" apps)
Remote device management of Windows Phone similar to management of Windows PCs
VoIP and video chat integration for any VoIP or video chat app (integrates into the phone dialer, people hub)
Firmware over the air for Windows Phone updates
Minimum 36 month support of Windows Phone updates to Windows Phone 8 devices.
Camera app now supports "lenses", which allow third parties to skin and add features to camera interface.
Native screen capture is added by pressing home and power buttons simultaneously.
Hebrew language support is added for Microsoft to introduce Windows Phone to the Israeli market.[27]
Hardware specifications[edit]
Windows Phone 8 minimum device specifications
Qualcomm Qualcomm Snapdragon S4 dual-core processor or Qualcomm Snapdragon 800 series (as of Update 3)
Minimum 512 MB RAM for WVGA phones; minimum 1 GB RAM for 720p / WXGA / 1080p
Minimum 4 GB flash memory
GPS and A-GNSS; GLONASS is supported, if OEMs decide to include it
Support for micro-USB 2.0
3.5 mm stereo headphone jack with three-button detection support
Rear-facing AF camera with optional LED or Xenon flash, optional front-facing camera (both need to be VGA or better) and dedicated camera button
Accelerometer, proximity and ambient light sensors, as well as vibration motor (magnetometer and gyroscope are optional)
802.11b/g and Bluetooth (802.11n is optional)
DirectX graphics hardware support with hardware acceleration for Direct3D using programmable GPU
Multi-touch capacitive touch screen with minimum of four simultaneous points
Version history[edit]
Main article: Windows Phone version history § Windows Phone 8
Reception[edit]
Reviewers generally praised the increased capabilities of Windows Phone 8, but noted the smaller app selection when compared to other phones. Brad Molen of Engadget mentioned that "Windows Phone 8 is precisely what we wanted to see come out of Redmond in the first place," and praised the more customizable Start Screen, compatibility with Windows 8, and improved NFC support. However, Molen also noted the drawback of a lack of apps in the Windows Phone Store.[28] The Verge gave the OS a 7.9/10 rating, stating that "Redmond is presenting one of the most compelling ecosystem stories in the business right now," but criticized the lack of a unified notifications center.[29] Alexandra Chang of Wired gave Windows Phone 8 an 8/10, noting improvement in features previously lacking in Windows Phone 7, such as multi-core processor support, faster Internet browsing, and the switch from Bing Maps to Nokia Maps, but also criticized the smaller selection of apps.[30]

Usage[edit]
IDC reported that in Q1 2013, the first full quarter where WP8 was available to most countries, Windows Phone market share jumped to 3.2% of the worldwide smartphone market, allowing the OS to overtake BlackBerry OS as the third largest mobile operating system by usage.[31]

Roughly a year after the release of WP8, Kantar reported in October 2013 that Windows Phone grew its market share substantially to 4.8% in the United States and 10.2% in Europe.[32] Similar statistics from Gartner for Q3 2013 indicated that Windows Phone's global market share increased 123% from the same period in 2012 to 3.6%.[33]

In Q1 2014 IDC reported that global market share of Windows Phone has dropped to 2.7%.[34]

Windows Server 2016 is a server operating system developed by Microsoft as part of the Windows NT family of operating systems, developed concurrently with Windows 10. The first early preview version (Technical Preview) became available on 1 October 2014 together with the first technical preview of System Center.[6] Windows Server 2016 was released on 26 September 2016 at Microsoft's Ignite conference[1] and became generally available on 12 October 2016.[2]

Contents  [hide]
1	Features
1.1	Networking features
1.2	Hyper-V
1.3	Nano Server
2	Development
2.1	Preview releases
2.2	Public release
3	Version history
3.1	Technical Preview
3.2	Technical Preview 2
3.3	Technical Preview 3
3.4	Technical Preview 4
3.5	Technical Preview 5
3.6	Release to manufacturing
4	Version 1709
5	See also
6	References
7	External links
Features[edit]
Windows Server 2016 has a variety of new features, including

Active Directory Federation Services: It is possible to configure AD FS to authenticate users stored in non-AD directories, such as X.500 compliant Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) directories and SQL databases.[7]
Windows Defender: Windows Server Antimalware is installed and enabled by default without the GUI, which is an installable Windows feature.[8]
Remote Desktop Services: Support for OpenGL 4.4 and OpenCL 1.1, performance and stability improvements; MultiPoint Services role (see Windows MultiPoint Server)[9]
Storage Services: Central Storage QoS Policies; Storage Replicas (storage-agnostic, block-level, volume-based, synchronous and asynchronous replication using SMB3 between servers for disaster recovery).[10] Storage Replica replicates blocks instead of files; files can be in use. It's not multi-master, not one-to-many and not transitive. It periodically replicates snapshots, and the replication direction can be changed.
Failover Clustering: Cluster operating system rolling upgrade, Storage Replicas[11]
Web Application Proxy: Preauthentication for HTTP Basic application publishing, wildcard domain publishing of applications, HTTP to HTTPS redirection, Propagation of client IP address to backend applications[12]
IIS 10: Support for HTTP/2
Windows PowerShell 5.1[13]
Windows Server Containers [14]
Networking features[edit]
DHCP: As Network Access Protection was deprecated in Windows Server 2012 R2, in Windows Server 2016 the DHCP role no longer supports NAP[15]
DNS:
DNS client: Service binding – enhanced support for computers with more than one network interface[16]
DNS Server: DNS policies, new DDS record types (TLSA, SPF, and unknown records), new PowerShell cmdlets and parameters[17]
Windows Server Gateway now supports Generic Routing Encapsulation (GRE) tunnels[18]
IP address management (IPAM): Support for /31, /32, and /128 subnets; discovery of file-based, domain-joined DNS servers; new DNS functions; better integration of DNS, DHCP, and IP Address (DDI) Management[19]
Network Controller: A new server role to configure, manage, monitor, and troubleshoot virtual and physical network devices and services in the datacentre[20]
Hyper-V Network virtualization: Programmable Hyper-V switch (a new building block of Microsoft's software-defined networking solution); VXLAN encapsulation support; Microsoft Software Load Balancer interoperability; better IEEE Ethernet standard compliance.[21]
Hyper-V[edit]
Rolling Hyper-V cluster update: Unlike upgrading clusters from Windows 2008 R2 to 2012 level, Windows Server 2016 cluster nodes can be added to a Hyper-V Cluster with nodes running Windows Server 2012 R2. The cluster continues to function at a Windows Server 2012 R2 feature level until all of the nodes in the cluster have been upgraded and the cluster functional level has been upgraded.[22]
Storage quality of service (QoS) to centrally monitor end-to-end storage performance and create policies using Hyper-V and Scale-Out File Servers
New, more efficient binary virtual machine configuration format (.VMCX extension for virtual machine configuration data and the .VMRS extension for runtime state data)
Production checkpoints
Hyper-V Manager: Alternate credentials support, down-level management, WS-Management protocol
Integration services for Windows guests distributed through Windows Update
Hot add and remove for network adapters (for generation 2 virtual machines) and memory (for generation 1 and generation 2 virtual machines)
Linux secure boot
Connected Standby compatibility
Storage Resiliency feature of Hyper-V is formed for detecting transitory loss of connectivity to VM storage. VMs will be paused until connectivity is re-established.[23]
RDMA compatible Virtual Switch[24]
Nano Server[edit]
Microsoft announced a new installation option, Nano Server, which offers a minimal-footprint headless version of Windows Server. It excludes the graphical user interface, WoW64 (support for 32-bit software) and Windows Installer. It does not support console login, either locally or via Remote Desktop Connection. All management is performed remotely via Windows Management Instrumentation (WMI), Windows PowerShell and Remote Server Management Tools (a collection of web-based GUI and command line tools).[25] However, in Technical Preview 5, Microsoft has re-added the ability to administer Nano Server locally through PowerShell. According to Microsoft engineer Jeffrey Snover, Nano Server has 93% lower VHD size, 92% fewer critical security advisories, and 80% fewer reboots than Windows Server.[26][27]

Nano Server is only available to Microsoft Software Assurance customers[2] and on cloud computing platforms such as Microsoft Azure and Amazon Web Services.

Starting with the new feature release of Windows Server, version 1709, Nano Server can only be installed inside a container host.[28]

Development[edit]
Microsoft has been reorganized by Satya Nadella, putting the Server and System Center teams together. Previously, the Server team was more closely aligned with the Windows client team. The Azure team is also working closely with the Server team.[29]

In March 2017, Microsoft demonstrated an internal version of Server 2016 running on the ARMv8-A architecture. It was reported that Microsoft was working with Qualcomm Centriq and Cavium ThunderX2 chips. According to James Vincent of The Verge, this decision endangers Intel's dominance of the server CPU market.[30][31][32] However, later inquiry from Microsoft revealed that this version of Windows Server is only for internal use and only impacts subscribers of Microsoft Azure service.[33]

Preview releases[edit]
Main article: Windows Insider
A public beta version of Windows Server 2016 (then still called vNext) branded as "Windows Server Technical Preview" was released on 1 October 2014; the technical preview builds are aimed toward enterprise users. The first Technical Preview was first set to expire on 15 April 2015 but[34] Microsoft later released a tool to extend the expiry date, to last until the second tech preview of the OS in May 2015.[35] The second beta version, "Technical Preview 2", was released on 4 May 2015. Third preview version, "Technical Preview 3" was released on 19 August 2015. "Technical Preview 4" was released on 19 November 2015. "Technical Preview 5" was released on 27 April 2016.

Windows Server 2016 Insider Preview Build 16237 was released to Windows Insiders on 13 July 2017.[36][37]

Public release[edit]
Windows Server 2016 was officially released at Microsoft's Ignite Conference on September 26, 2016. Unlike its predecessor, Windows Server 2016 is licensed by the number of CPU cores rather than number of CPU sockets—a change that has similarly been adopted by BizTalk Server 2013 and SQL Server 2014.[38] The new licensing structure that has been adopted by Windows Server 2016 has also moved away from the Windows Server 2012/2012R2 CPU socket licensing model in that now the amount of cores covered under one license is limited. Windows Server 2016 Standard and Datacenter core licensing now covers a minimum of 8 core licenses for each physical processor and a minimum of 16 core licenses for each server. Core licenses are sold in packs of two with Standard Edition providing the familiar rights to run 2 virtualized OS environments. If the server goes over 16 core licenses for a 2 processor server additional licenses will now be required with Windows Server 2016. [39]

Version history[edit]
Technical Preview[edit]
Windows Server 2016 Technical Preview, released on 1 October 2014, was the first beta version of the operating system made publicly available. Its version number was 6.4.9841.[6]

Technical Preview 2[edit]
Windows Server 2016 Technical Preview 2 was made available on 4 May 2015. Its version number was 10.0.10074. (A similar jump in the most significant part of the version number from 6 to 10 is seen in Windows 10.) Highlights of this version include:[40]

Nano Server installation option[41][42]
Hyper-V: hot add and remove memory and NIC; resilient virtual machines to keep running even when their cluster fabric fails[43]
Rolling upgrades for Hyper-V and Storage clusters[41][43]
Networking: Converged NIC across tenant and RDMA traffic; PacketDirect on 40G[43]
Storage: Virtual Machine Storage Path resiliency; Storage Spaces Direct to aggregate Storage Spaces across multiple servers; Storage Replica[43]
Security: Host Guardian Service, helping to keep trust and isolation boundary between the cloud infrastructure and guest OS layers; Just Enough Administration, restricting users to perform only specific tasks[43]
Management: PowerShell Desired State Configuration; PowerShell Package Manager; Windows Management Framework 5.0 April Preview and DSC Resource Kit[43]
Other: Conditional access control in AD FS; application authentication support for OpenID Connect and OAuth; full OpenGL support with RDS for VDI; Server-side support for HTTP/2, including header compression, connection multiplexing and server push[43]
Installation options: Minimal Server Interface was made default and renamed the Server installation option to “Server with local admin tools”.[44]
Technical Preview 3[edit]
The third technical preview of Windows Server 2016 was made available on 19 August 2015. Its version number was 10.0.10514. Highlights of this version include:

Windows Server Containers[45]
Active Directory Federation Services (AD FS): authentication of users stored in Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) directories[45]
Installation options: The Server installation option had been renamed to “Server with Desktop Experience” having the shell and Desktop Experience installed by default. Due to the structural changes required to deliver the Desktop Experience on Server, it is no longer possible to convert from Server with Desktop Experience to Server Core or to convert Server Core up to Server with Desktop Experience.[44]
Technical Preview 4[edit]
The fourth technical preview of the operating system was made available on 19 November 2015, one year and one month after the initial technical preview. Its version number was 10.0.10586. Its highlights include:

Nano Server supports the DNS Server and IIS server roles, as well as MPIO, VMM, SCOM, DSC push mode, DCB, Windows Server Installer, and the WMI provider for Windows Update. Its Recovery Console supports editing and repairing the network configuration. A Windows PowerShell module is now available to simplify building Nano Server images.[46]
Hyper-V Containers encapsulates each container in a light weight virtual machine.[46]
Technical Preview 5[edit]
The last technical preview of Windows Server 2016 was made available on 27 April 2016. Its version number was 10.0.14300. Its highlights include:[47]

Mostly general refinements. Greater time accuracy in both physical and virtual machines
Container support adds performance improvements, simplified network management, and support for Windows containers on Windows 10
Nano Server: an updated module for building Nano Server images, including more separation of physical host and guest virtual machine functionality as well as support for different Windows Server editions. Improvements to the Recovery Console, including separation of inbound and outbound firewall rules as well as the ability to repair configuration of WinRM
Networking: traffic to new or existing virtual appliances can now be both mirrored and routed. With a distributed firewall and Network security groups, this enables dynamically segmented and secure workloads in a manner similar to Azure. One can deploy and manage the entire Software-defined networking (SDN) stack using System Center Virtual Machine Manager. Docker can be used to manage Windows Server container networking, and associate SDN policies not only with virtual machines but containers as well
Remote Desktop Services: a highly available RDS deployment can leverage Azure SQL Database for the RD Connection Brokers in high availability mode
Management: ability to run PowerShell.exe locally on Nano Server (no longer remote only), new Local Users & Groups cmdlets to replace the GUI, added PowerShell debugging support, and added support in Nano Server for security logging & transcription and JEA (Just Enough Administration)
Shielded Virtual Machines:
New "Encryption Supported" mode that offers more protections than for an ordinary virtual machine, but less than "Shielded" mode, while still supporting vTPM, disk encryption, Live Migration traffic encryption, and other features, including direct fabric administration conveniences such as virtual machine console connections and Powershell Direct
Full support for converting existing non-shielded Generation 2 virtual machines to shielded virtual machines, including automated disk encryption
Shielded virtual machines are compatible with Hyper-V Replica
Release to manufacturing[edit]
Windows Server 2016 was released to manufacturing on 26 September 2016, bearing the version number of 10.0.14393. (Same version number as Windows 10 Anniversary Update.) Microsoft added the following final touches:

Available for a 180-day evaluation
Fixed Start menu corruptions
Improved user experience and performance
Windows Store apps have been removed
Login screen now has a background
The Windows Hello feature has been added
Dark theme has been added
Version 1709[edit]
Windows Server version 1709 was released on 17 October 2017.[48] It is offered to the Microsoft Software Assurance customers who have an active Windows Server 2016 license and has the same system requirements. This is the first Windows Server product to fall under the "Semi-Annual Channel" (SAC) release cadence. This product only features the Server Core and the Nano Server modes. Of the two, only the Server Core mode of the OS can be installed on a bare system. The Nano Server mode is only available as an operating system container.[49]

Windows Server 2012, codenamed "Windows Server 8",[4] is the sixth release of Windows Server. It is the server version of Windows 8 and succeeds Windows Server 2008 R2. Two pre-release versions, a developer preview and a beta version, were released during development. The software was generally available to customers starting on September 4, 2012.[5]

Unlike its predecessor, Windows Server 2012 has no support for Itanium-based computers,[6] and has four editions. Various features were added or improved over Windows Server 2008 R2 (with many placing an emphasis on cloud computing), such as an updated version of Hyper-V, an IP address management role, a new version of Windows Task Manager, and ReFS, a new file system. Windows Server 2012 received generally good reviews in spite of having included the same controversial Metro-based user interface seen in Windows 8.

The successor to Windows Server 2012, called Windows Server 2012 R2, was released along with Windows 8.1 in October 2013. A service pack, formally designated Windows Server 2012 R2 Update, was released in April 2014.[7][8]

Contents  [hide]
1	History
2	Features
2.1	Installation options
2.2	User interface
2.3	Task Manager
2.4	IP address management (IPAM)
2.5	Active Directory
2.6	Hyper-V
2.7	ReFS
2.8	IIS 8.0
2.9	Scalability
3	System requirements
4	Editions
5	Reception
6	Windows Server 2012 R2
6.1	Changes from Windows Server 2012
7	See also
8	Notes
9	References
10	Further reading
11	External links
History[edit]
Windows Server 2012, codenamed "Windows Server 8",[4] is the sixth release of Windows Server family of operating systems developed concurrently with Windows 8.[9][10] It was not until April 17, 2012 that the company announced that the final product name would be "Windows Server 2012".[4]

Microsoft introduced Windows Server 2012 and its developer preview in the BUILD 2011 conference on September 9, 2011.[11] However, unlike Windows 8, the developer preview of Windows Server 2012 was only made available to MSDN subscribers.[12] It included a graphical user interface (GUI) based on Metro design language and a new Server Manager, a graphical application used for server management.[13] On February 16, 2012, Microsoft released an update for developer preview build that extended its expiry date from April 8, 2012 to January 15, 2013.[14]

Before Windows Server 2012 was finalized, two test builds were made public. A public beta version of Windows Server 2012 was released along with the Windows 8 Consumer Preview on February 29, 2012.[9] The release candidate of Windows Server 2012 was released on May 31, 2012, along with the Windows 8 Release Preview.[10]

The product was released to manufacturing on August 1, 2012 and became generally available on September 4, 2012.[5] However, not all editions of Windows Server 2012 were released at the same time. Windows Server 2012 Essentials was released to manufacturing on October 9, 2012[15] and was made generally available on November 1, 2012.[16] As of September 23, 2012, all students subscribed to DreamSpark program can download Windows Server 2012 Standard or Datacenter free of charge.[17]

Features[edit]
See also: Features new to Windows 8
Installation options[edit]
Unlike its predecessor, Windows Server 2012 can switch between "Server Core" and "Server with a GUI" installation options without a full reinstallation. Server Core – an option with a command-line interface only – is now the recommended configuration. There is also a third installation option that allows some GUI elements such as MMC and Server Manager to run, but without the normal desktop, shell or default programs like File Explorer.[13]

User interface[edit]
Server Manager has been redesigned with an emphasis on easing management of multiple servers.[18] The operating system, like Windows 8, uses the Metro-based user interface unless installed in Server Core mode.[19] Windows Store is available in this version of Windows but is not installed by default.[20] Windows PowerShell in this version has over 2300 commandlets, compared to around 200 in Windows Server 2008 R2.[21]

Task Manager[edit]
Main article: Windows Task Manager
Windows Server 2012 includes a new version of Windows Task Manager together with the old version.[22] In the new version the tabs are hidden by default, showing applications only. In the new Processes tab, the processes are displayed in varying shades of yellow, with darker shades representing heavier resource use.[23] It lists application names and status, as well as CPU, memory, hard disk and network utilization. The process information found in the older versions are now moved to the new Details tab. The Performance tab shows "CPU", "Memory", "Disk", "Wi-Fi" and "Ethernet" graphs. The CPU tab no longer displays individual graphs for every logical processor on the system by default, although that remains an option. Additionally, it can display data for each non-uniform memory access (NUMA) node. When displaying data for each logical processor for machines with more than 64 logical processors, the CPU tab now displays simple utilization percentages on heat-mapping tiles.[24] The color used for these heat maps is blue, with darker shades again indicating heavier utilization. Hovering the cursor over any logical processor's data now shows the NUMA node of that processor and its ID, if applicable. Additionally, a new Startup tab has been added that lists startup applications,[25] however this tab does not exist in Windows Server 2012.[26] The new task manager recognizes when a Windows Store app has the "Suspended" status.

IP address management (IPAM)[edit]
Windows Server 2012 has an IP address management role for discovering, monitoring, auditing, and managing the IP address space used on a corporate network. The IPAM is used for the management and monitoring of Domain Name System (DNS) and Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) servers. Both IPv4 and IPv6 are fully supported.[27]

Active Directory[edit]
Windows Server 2012 has a number of changes to Active Directory from the version shipped with Windows Server 2008 R2. The Active Directory Domain Services installation wizard has been replaced by a new section in Server Manager, and a GUI has been added to the Active Directory Recycle Bin.[28] Multiple password policies can be set in the same domain.[29] Active Directory in Windows Server 2012 is now aware of any changes resulting from virtualization, and virtualized domain controllers can be safely cloned. Upgrades of the domain functional level to Windows Server 2012 are simplified; it can be performed entirely in Server Manager. Active Directory Federation Services is no longer required to be downloaded when installed as a role, and claims which can be used by the Active Directory Federation Services have been introduced into the Kerberos token. Windows Powershell commands used by Active Directory Administrative Center can be viewed in a "Powershell History Viewer".[30][31]

Hyper-V[edit]
Windows Server 2012, along with Windows 8, includes a new version of Hyper-V,[32] as presented at the Microsoft BUILD event.[33] Many new features have been added to Hyper-V, including network virtualization, multi-tenancy, storage resource pools, cross-premises connectivity, and cloud backup. Additionally, many of the former restrictions on resource consumption have been greatly lifted. Each virtual machine in this version of Hyper-V can access up to 64 virtual processors, up to 1 terabyte of memory, and up to 64 terabytes of virtual disk space per virtual hard disk (using a new .vhdx format).[34][35] Up to 1024 virtual machines can be active per host, and up to 8000 can be active per failover cluster.[36] SLAT is a required processor feature for Hyper-V on Windows 8, while for Windows Server 2012 it is only required for the supplementary RemoteFX role.[37]

ReFS[edit]
Main article: ReFS
Resilient File System (ReFS),[38] codenamed "Protogon",[39] is a new file system in Windows Server 2012 initially intended for file servers that improves on NTFS in some respects. Major new features of ReFS include:[40][41]

Improved reliability for on-disk structures
ReFS uses B+ trees[40] for all on-disk structures including metadata and file data. Metadata and file data are organized into tables similar to a relational database. The file size, number of files in a folder, total volume size and number of folders in a volume are limited by 64-bit numbers; as a result ReFS supports a maximum file size of 16 exabytes, a maximum of 18.4 × 1018 folders and a maximum volume size of 1 yottabyte (with 64 KB clusters) which allows large scalability with no practical limits on file and folder size (hardware restrictions still apply). Free space is counted by a hierarchical allocator which includes three separate tables for large, medium, and small chunks. File names and file paths are each limited to a 32 KB Unicode text string.
Built-in resilience
ReFS employs an allocation-on-write update strategy for metadata,[40] which allocates new chunks for every update transaction and uses large IO batches. All ReFS metadata has built-in 64-bit checksums which are stored independently. The file data can have an optional checksum in a separate "integrity stream", in which case the file update strategy also implements allocation-on-write; this is controlled by a new "integrity" attribute applicable to both files and directories. If nevertheless file data or metadata becomes corrupt, the file can be deleted without taking the whole volume offline. As a result of built-in resiliency, administrators do not need to periodically run error-checking tools such as CHKDSK when using ReFS.
Compatibility with existing APIs and technologies
ReFS does not require new system APIs and most file system filters continue to work with ReFS volumes.[40] ReFS supports many existing Windows and NTFS features such as BitLocker encryption, Access Control Lists, USN Journal, change notifications,[42] symbolic links, junction points, mount points, reparse points, volume snapshots, file IDs, and oplock. ReFS seamlessly[40] integrates with Storage Spaces, a storage virtualization layer that allows data mirroring and striping, as well as sharing storage pools between machines.[43] ReFS resiliency features enhance the mirroring feature provided by Storage Spaces and can detect whether any mirrored copies of files become corrupt using background data scrubbing process, which periodically reads all mirror copies and verifies their checksums then replaces bad copies with good ones.
Some NTFS features are not supported in ReFS, including object IDs, short names, file compression, file level encryption (EFS), user data transactions, hard links, extended attributes, and disk quotas.[39][40] Sparse files are supported.[44][45] Support for named streams is not implemented in Windows 8 and Windows Server 2012, though it was later added in Windows 8.1 and Windows Server 2012 R2.[46] ReFS does not itself offer data deduplication.[40] Dynamic disks with mirrored or striped volumes are replaced with mirrored or striped storage pools provided by Storage Spaces. In Windows Server 2012, automated error-correction with integrity streams is only supported on mirrored spaces; automatic recovery on parity spaces was added in Windows 8.1 and Windows Server 2012 R2.[46] Booting from ReFS is not supported either.

IIS 8.0[edit]
Windows Server 2012 includes version 8.0 of Internet Information Services (IIS). The new version contains new features such as SNI, CPU usage caps for particular websites,[47] centralized management of SSL certificates, WebSocket support and improved support for NUMA, but few other substantial changes were made.[48]

Scalability[edit]
Windows Server 2012 supports the following maximum hardware specifications.[35][49] Windows Server 2012 improves over its predecessor Windows Server 2008 R2:

Specification	Windows Server 2012	Windows Server 2008 R2
Physical processors[a]	64	64
Logical processors
when Hyper-V is disabled	640	256
Logical processors
when Hyper-V is enabled	320[b]	64
Memory	4 TB	2 TB
Failover cluster nodes (in any single cluster)	64	16
System requirements[edit]
Minimum system requirements for Windows Server 2012[51]
Processor	1.4 GHz, x64
Memory	512 MB
Free disk space	32 GB (more if there is at least 16 GB of RAM)
Windows Server 2012 runs only on x64 processors. Unlike its predecessor, Windows Server 2012 does not support Itanium.[6]

Upgrades from Windows Server 2008 and Windows Server 2008 R2 are supported, although upgrades from prior releases are not.[51]

Editions[edit]
Windows Server 2012 has four editions: Foundation, Essentials, Standard and Datacenter.[52][53][54][55][49]

Specifications	Foundation[56]	Essentials	Standard	Datacenter
Distribution	OEM only	Retail, volume licensing, OEM	Retail, volume licensing, OEM	Volume licensing and OEM
Licensing model	Per server	Per server	Per CPU pair[c] + CAL[d]	Per CPU pair[c] + CAL[d]
Processor chip limit[49]	1	2	64[e]	64[e]
Memory limit	32 GB	64 GB	4 TB	4 TB
User limit	15	25	Unlimited	Unlimited
File sharing limits	1 standalone DFS root	1 standalone DFS root	Unlimited	Unlimited
Network Policy and Access Services limits	50 RRAS connections and 10 IAS connections	250 RRAS connections, 50 IAS connections, and 2 IAS Server Groups	Unlimited	Unlimited
Remote Desktop Services limits	50 Remote Desktop Services connections	Gateway only	Unlimited	Unlimited
Virtualization rights	N/A	Either in 1 VM or 1 physical server, but not both at once	2 VMs[c]	Unlimited
Active Directory Lightweight Directory Services	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes
Active Directory Federation Services	Yes[57]	Yes	Yes	Yes
Active Directory Rights Management Services	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes
Application server role	Yes	Partial	Yes	Yes
DHCP role	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes
DNS server role	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes
Fax server role	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes
Print and document services	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes
Server Manager	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes
UDDI services	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes
Web services (Internet Information Services)	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes
Windows Deployment Services	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes
Windows Powershell	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes
Active Directory Domain Services	Must be root of forest and domain	Yes	Yes	Yes
Active Directory Certificate Services	Certificate Authorities only	Certificate Authorities only	Yes	Yes
Hyper-V	No	No	Yes	Yes
Server Core mode	No	No	Yes	Yes
Windows Server Update Services	No	No	Yes	Yes
Reception[edit]
Reviews of Windows Server 2012 have been generally positive.[58][59][60] Simon Bisson of ZDNet described it as "ready for the datacenter, today,"[58] while Tim Anderson of The Register said that "The move towards greater modularity, stronger automation and improved virtualisation makes perfect sense in a world of public and private clouds" but remarked that "That said, the capability of Windows to deliver obscure and time-consuming errors is unchanged" and concluded that "Nevertheless, this is a strong upgrade overall."[59]

InfoWorld noted that Server 2012's use of Windows 8's panned "Metro" user interface was countered by Microsoft's increasing emphasis on the Server Core mode, which had been "fleshed out with new depth and ease-of-use features" and increased use of the "practically mandatory" PowerShell.[61] However, Michael Otey of Windows IT Pro expressed dislike with the new Metro interface and the lack of ability to use the older desktop interface alone, saying that most users of Windows Server manage their servers using the graphical user interface rather than PowerShell.[62] The Australian construction company Kennards found the OS stable.[63]

Paul Ferrill wrote that "Windows Server 2012 Essentials provides all the pieces necessary to provide centralized file storage, client backups, and remote access,"[64] but Tim Anderson contended that "Many businesses that are using SBS2011 and earlier will want to stick with what they have", citing the absence of Exchange, the lack of ability to synchronize with Active Directory Federation Services and the 25-user limit,[65] while Paul Thurott wrote "you should choose Foundation only if you have at least some in-company IT staff and/or are comfortable outsourcing management to a Microsoft partner or solution provider" and "Essentials is, in my mind, ideal for any modern startup of just a few people."[66]

Windows Server 2012 R2[edit]
Windows Server 2012 R2 was released on October 18, 2013.[67] It was unveiled on June 3, 2013 at TechEd North America.[68] According to Windows Server 2012 R2 datasheet published on May 31, 2013, there are four editions of this operating system: Foundation, Essentials, Standard and Datacenter.[69] As with Windows Server 2012, the Datacenter and Standard editions are feature-identical, varying only based on licensing (particularly licensing of virtual instances). The Essentials edition has the same features as the Datacenter and Standard products, with some restrictions.[70]

A further update, formally designated Windows Server 2012 R2 Update, was released in April 2014,[7] a cumulative set of security updates, critical updates and updates.[71]

Windows Server 2012 R2 was succeeded by Windows Server 2016.

Changes from Windows Server 2012[edit]
Microsoft has confirmed the following changes introduced by Windows Server 2012 R2:

Automated Tiering: Storage Spaces stores most frequently accessed files on fastest physical media[72]
Deduplication for VHD: Reduces the storage space for VHD files with largely similar contents by storing the similar contents only once[72]
Windows PowerShell v4, which now includes a Desired State Configuration (DSC) feature
Integrated Office 365 support (Essentials edition)
User interface changes from Windows 8.1, including visible Start button.[73]
UEFI-based virtual machines
Upgrades from driver emulators to synthetic hardware drivers to minimize legacy support
Faster VM deployment (approximately half the time)[74]
Internet Information Services 8.5: Support for logging to Event Tracing for Windows and the ability to log any request/response headers. To improve scalability, if IIS is configured with 100 or more web sites, by default it will not automatically start any of them. Alongside this, a new "Idle Worker Process Page-Out" configuration option has been added to application pools to instruct Windows to page-out the process if it has been idle for the idle time-out period (by default, 20 minutes).[75]
Server Message Block: Performance and event logging quality improvements, support for Hyper-V Live Migration over SMB, bandwidth prioritization management, and the ability to remove SMB 1.0 support[76]
Windows Deployment Services: Support for managing WDS via PowerShell.[77]
Windows Defender is available in a Server Core installation, and is installed and enabled by default.[78][dubious – discuss]
IP Address Management (IPAM): Extended to support role-based access control, allowing for fine-grained control over which users can view or change configurations for DHCP reservations, scopes, IP address blocks, DNS resource records, etc. Additionally, IPAM can integrate with System Center Virtual Machine Manager 2012 R2 to have coordinated IP policy across both physical and virtual environments. The IPAM database can be stored in a SQL Server instance instead of Windows Internal Database.[79]
Group Policy has a new "Policy Cache" setting which allows domain-joined machines to store a copy of the group policy settings on the client machine and, depending on the speed of access to the domain controller, use those at startup time instead of waiting for the policy settings to download. This can improve startup times on machines that are disconnected from the company network.[80] New Group Policy settings have been added to cover new features in Windows 8.1 and Internet Explorer 11, such as enabling/disabling SPDY/3 support, configuring start screen layouts, and detecting phone numbers in web pages.[81]
TLS support is extended to support RFC 5077, "Transport Layer Security (TLS) Session Resumption without Server-Side State", which improves performance of long-running TLS-secured connections that need to reconnect due to session expiration.
Hyper-V role and Hyper-V management console are added to the Essentials edition.[82]
Windows Server Update Services was made available for Windows Server 2012 R2 Essentials edition.[83]
ReFS gained support for alternate data streams and automatic error-correction on parity spaces.[46]

Windows Server 2008 R2 is a server operating system produced by Microsoft. It was released to manufacturing (RTM) on July 22, 2009[4] and launched on October 22, 2009.[5] According to the Windows Server Blog, the retail availability was September 14, 2009.[6] It is built on the same kernel used with the client-oriented Windows 7. It is the first 64-bit–only operating system released from Microsoft. Enhancements include new functionality for Active Directory, new virtualization and management features, version 7.5 of the Internet Information Services (IIS) web server and support for up to 256[7] logical processors.

There are seven editions: Foundation, Standard, Enterprise, Datacenter, Web, HPC Server and Itanium, as well as Windows Storage Server 2008 R2.

Contents  [hide]
1	History
2	New features
3	Service Pack
4	System requirements
5	Editions
6	See also
7	References
8	External links
History[edit]
Microsoft introduced Windows Server 2008 R2 at the 2008 Professional Developers Conference as the server variant of Windows 7.

On January 7, 2009, a beta release of Windows Server 2008 R2 was made available to subscribers of Microsoft's TechNet and MSDN programs, as well as those participating in the Microsoft Connect program for Windows 7. Two days later, the beta was released to the public via the Microsoft Download Center.[8]

On April 30, 2009, the release candidate was made available to subscribers of TechNet and MSDN.[9] On May 5, 2009, the release candidate was made available to the general public via the Microsoft download center.[10]

According to Windows Server Blog,[6] the following are the dates of the year 2009 when Microsoft Windows Server 2008 R2 has been made available to various distribution channels:

OEMs received Windows Server 2008 R2 in English and all language packs on July 29. The remaining languages were available around August 11.
Independent software vendor (ISV) and independent hardware vendor (IHV) partners have been able to download Windows Server 2008 R2 from MSDN starting on August 14.
IT professionals with TechNet subscriptions were able to download Windows Server 2008 R2 and obtain product keys for English, French, German, Italian, and Spanish variants beginning August 14 and all remaining languages beginning August 21.
Developers with MSDN subscriptions have been able to download and obtain product keys for Windows Server 2008 R2 in English, French, German, Italian, and Spanish starting August 14 and all remaining languages starting August 21.
Microsoft Partner Program (MPP) gold/certified members were able to download Windows Server 2008 R2 through the MPP portal on August 19.
Volume licensing customers with an existing Software Assurance (SA) contracts were able to download Windows Server 2008 R2 on August 19 via the Volume License Service Center.
Volume licensing customers without an SA were able to purchase Windows Server 2008 R2 through volume licensing by September 1.
Additionally, qualifying students have been able to download Windows Server 2008 R2 Standard edition in 15 languages from the Microsoft Imagine program (known as DreamSpark at the time).[11]

Microsoft has announced that Server 2008 R2 will be the last version of Windows supporting the Itanium architecture, with its extended support ending earlier than for the regular non-Itanium edition or "until July 10, 2018".[12][13]

New features[edit]
See also: Features new to Windows 7
A reviewer guide published by the company describes several areas of improvement in R2.[14] These include new virtualization capabilities (Live Migration, Cluster Shared Volumes using Failover Clustering and Hyper-V), reduced power consumption, a new set of management tools and new Active Directory capabilities such as a "recycle bin" for deleted objects. IIS 7.5 has been added to this release which also includes updated FTP server services. Security enhancements include encrypted clientless authenticated VPN services through DirectAccess for clients using Windows 7, and the addition of DNSSEC support for DNS Server Service. Even though DNSSEC as such is supported, only one signature algorithm is available:[15] #5 / RSA/SHA-1. Since many zones use a different algorithm – including the root zone – this means that in reality Windows still can't serve as a recursive resolver.

The DHCP server supports a large number of enhancements[16] such as MAC address-based control filtering, converting active leases into reservations or Link Layer based filters, DHCP Name protection for non-Windows machines to prevent name squatting, better performance through aggressive lease database caching, DHCP activity logging, auto-population of certain network interface fields, a wizard for split-scope configuration, DHCP Server role migration using WSMT, support for DHCPv6 Option 15 (User Class) and Option 32 (Information Refresh Time). The DHCP server runs in the context of the Network Service account which has fewer privileges to reduce potential damage if compromised.

Windows Server 2008 R2 supports up to 64 physical processors[17] or up to 256 logical processors per system. (Only the Datacenter and Itanium editions can take advantage of the capability of 64 physical processors. Enterprise, the next-highest edition after those two, can only use 8.)[18] When deployed in a file server role, new File Classification Infrastructure services allow files to be stored on designated servers in the enterprise based on business naming conventions, relevance to business processes and overall corporate policies.[19]

Server Core includes a subset of the .NET Framework, so that some applications (including ASP.NET web sites and Windows PowerShell 2.0) can be used.

Performance improvement was a major area of focus for this release; Microsoft has stated that work was done to decrease boot time, improve the efficiency of I/O operations while using less processing power, and generally improve the speed of storage devices, especially iSCSI.

Active Directory has several new features when raising the forest and domain functional levels[20] to Windows Server 2008 R2: Two added features are Authentication Mechanism Assurance and Automatic SPN Management. When raising the forest functional level, the Active Directory recycle bin feature is available and can be enabled using the Active Directory Module for Powershell.[21]

Service Pack[edit]
On February 9, 2011, Microsoft officially released Service Pack 1 (SP1) for Windows 7 and Windows Server 2008 R2 to OEM partners. Apart from bug fixes, it introduces two new major functions, RemoteFX and Dynamic Memory. RemoteFX enables the use of graphics hardware in order to include support for 3D graphics in a Hyper-V based VM. Dynamic Memory makes it possible for a VM to only allocate as much physical RAM as is needed temporarily for its execution. On February 16, SP1 became available for MSDN and TechNet subscribers as well as volume licensing customers. As of February 22, SP1 is generally available for download via the Microsoft Download Center and available on Windows Update.[22]

System requirements[edit]
System requirements for Windows Server 2008 R2 are as follows:[23]

Processor
1.4 GHz x86-64 or Itanium 2 processor
Memory
Minimum: 512 MB RAM (may limit performance and some features)
Recommended: 2 GB RAM
Maximum: 8 GB RAM (Foundation), 32 GB RAM (Standard), or 2 TB RAM (Enterprise, Datacenter and Itanium)
Display
Super VGA (800×600) or higher
Disk Space Requirements
Minimum (editions higher than Foundation): 32 GB or more
Minimum (Foundation edition) 10 GB or more.
Computers with more than 16 GB of RAM require more disk space for paging and dump files.[23]
Other
DVD drive, keyboard and mouse, Internet access (required for updates and online activation)
Editions[edit]
Windows Server 2008 R2 edition comparison chart[24]
Features	Foundation	Standard	Web	HPC	Enterprise	Datacenter	Itanium
Maximum RAM on x86-64	8 GB	32 GB	32 GB	256 GB	2 TB	2 TB	2 TB
Maximum physical CPUs	1	4	4	4	8	64	64
Failover cluster nodes (Nodes)	N/A	N/A	N/A	N/A	16	16	8
Cross-file replication (DFS-R)	No	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes	Yes[25]
Fault tolerant memory sync	No	No	No	No	Yes	Yes	Yes
Memory modules: Hot addition	No	No	No	No	Yes	Yes	Yes
Memory modules: Hot replacement	No	No	No	No	No	Yes	Yes
CPUs: Hot addition	No	No	No	No	No	Yes	Yes
CPUs: Hot replacement	No	No	No	No	No	Yes	Yes
IAS connection	10	50	No	No	Unlimited	Unlimited	2
Remote Desktop Services connections	50	250	No	No	Unlimited	Unlimited	No
RRAS connections	50	250	No	250	Unlimited	Unlimited	No
Virtual image use rights	Forbidden	Host + 1 VM	1 VM	Host + 1 VM	Host + 4 VMs	Unlimited	Unlimited
Features	Foundation	Standard	Web	HPC	Enterprise	Datacenter	Itanium
Windows Server 2008 is one of Microsoft Windows' server line of operating systems. Released to manufacturing on February 4, 2008, and officially released on February 27, 2008, it is the successor to Windows Server 2003, released nearly five years earlier. A second release, named Windows Server 2008 R2, was released to manufacturing on July 22, 2009.[4]

Contents  [hide]
1	History
2	Features
2.1	Server Core
2.2	Active Directory roles
2.3	Failover Clustering
2.4	Self-healing NTFS
2.5	Hyper-V
2.6	Windows System Resource Manager
2.7	Server Manager
2.8	Other features
2.8.1	Core OS improvements
2.8.2	Active Directory improvements
2.8.3	Policy related improvements
2.8.4	Disk management and file storage improvements
2.8.5	Protocol and cryptography improvements
2.8.6	Miscellaneous improvements
3	Removed features
4	Editions
5	Service Pack
6	Windows Server 2008 R2
7	System requirements
8	Scalability
9	See also
10	Notes
11	References
12	Further reading
13	External links
History[edit]
Originally known as Windows Server Codename "Longhorn", Microsoft chairman Bill Gates announced its official title (Windows Server 2008) during his keynote address at WinHEC 16 May 2007.[5]

Beta 1 was released on 27 July 2005, Beta 2 was announced and released on 23 May 2006 at WinHEC 2006 and Beta 3 was released publicly on 25 April 2007.[6] Release Candidate 0 was released to the general public on 24 September 2007[7] and Release Candidate 1 was released to the general public on 5 December 2007. Windows Server 2008 was released to manufacturing on 4 February 2008 and officially launched on 27 February 2008.[8]

Features[edit]
See also: Features new to Windows Vista
Windows Server 2008 is built from the same code base as Windows Vista; therefore, it shares much of the same architecture and functionality. Since the code base is common, it automatically comes with most of the technical, security, management and administrative features new to Windows Vista such as the rewritten networking stack (native IPv6, native wireless, speed and security improvements); improved image-based installation, deployment and recovery; improved diagnostics, monitoring, event logging and reporting tools; new security features such as BitLocker and ASLR (address space layout randomization); improved Windows Firewall with secure default configuration; .NET Framework 3.0 technologies, specifically Windows Communication Foundation, Microsoft Message Queuing and Windows Workflow Foundation; and the core kernel, memory and file system improvements. Processors and memory devices are modeled as Plug and Play devices, to allow hot-plugging of these devices. This allows the system resources to be partitioned dynamically using Dynamic Hardware Partitioning; each partition has its own memory, processor and I/O host bridge devices independent of other partitions.[9]

Server Core[edit]

Default user interface for Server Core. Because Windows Explorer is removed from Server Core, programs such as Notepad use the Windows NT 3.1-style file dialog.
Windows Server 2008 includes a variation of installation called Server Core. Server Core is a significantly scaled-back installation where no Windows Explorer shell is installed. All configuration and maintenance is done entirely through command-line interface windows, or by connecting to the machine remotely using Microsoft Management Console. However, Notepad and some control panel applets, such as Regional Settings, are available.

Server Core does not include the .NET Framework, Internet Explorer, Windows PowerShell or many other features not related to core server features. A Server Core machine can be configured for several basic roles: Domain controller/Active Directory Domain Services, ADLDS (ADAM), DNS Server, DHCP server, file server, print server, Windows Media Server, IIS 7 web server and Hyper-V virtual server. Server Core can also be used to create a cluster with high availability using failover clustering or network load balancing.

Andrew Mason, a program manager on the Windows Server team, noted that a primary motivation for producing a Server Core variant of Windows Server 2008 was to reduce the attack surface of the operating system, and that about 70% of the security vulnerabilities in Microsoft Windows from the prior five years would not have affected Server Core.[10]

Active Directory roles[edit]
Active Directory roles are expanded with identity, certificate, and rights management services. Active Directory, until Windows Server 2003, allowed network administrators to centrally manage connected computers, to set policies for groups of users, and to centrally deploy new applications to multiple computers. This role of Active Directory is being renamed as Active Directory Domain Services (ADDS).[11] A number of other additional services are being introduced, including Active Directory Federation Services (ADFS), Active Directory Lightweight Directory Services (AD LDS), (formerly Active Directory Application Mode, or ADAM), Active Directory Certificate Services (ADCS), and Active Directory Rights Management Services (ADRMS). Identity and certificate services allow administrators to manage user accounts and the digital certificates that allow them to access certain services and systems. Federation management services enable enterprises to share credentials with trusted partners and customers, allowing a consultant to use his company user name and password to log in on a client's network. Identity Integration Feature Pack is included as Active Directory Metadirectory Services. Each of these services represents a server role.

Failover Clustering[edit]
Main article: Microsoft Cluster Server
Windows Server 2008 offers high availability to services and applications through Failover Clustering. Most server features and roles can be kept running with little to no downtime.

In Windows Server 2008 and Windows Server 2008 R2, the way clusters are qualified changed significantly with the introduction of the cluster validation wizard.[12] The cluster validation wizard is a feature that is integrated into failover clustering in Windows Server 2008 and Windows Server 2008 R2. With the cluster validation wizard, an administrator can run a set of focused tests on a collection of servers that are intended to use as nodes in a cluster. This cluster validation process tests the underlying hardware and software directly, and individually, to obtain an accurate assessment of how well failover clustering can be supported on a given configuration.

This feature is only available in Enterprise and Datacenter editions of Windows Server.

Self-healing NTFS[edit]
In Windows versions prior to Windows Vista, if the operating system detected corruption in the file system of an NTFS volume, it marked the volume "dirty"; to correct errors on the volume, it had to be taken offline. With self-healing NTFS, an NTFS worker thread is spawned in the background which performs a localized fix-up of damaged data structures, with only the corrupted files/folders remaining unavailable without locking out the entire volume and needing the server to be taken down. The operating system now features S.M.A.R.T. detection techniques to help determine when a hard disk may fail.[13]

Hyper-V[edit]

Hyper-V architecture
Main article: Hyper-V
Hyper-V is hypervisor-based virtualization software, forming a core part of Microsoft's virtualization strategy. It virtualizes servers on an operating system's kernel layer. It can be thought of as partitioning a single physical server into multiple small computational partitions. Hyper-V includes the ability to act as a Xen virtualization hypervisor host allowing Xen-enabled guest operating systems to run virtualized.[14] A beta version of Hyper-V shipped with certain x86-64 editions of Windows Server 2008, prior to Microsoft's release of the final version of Hyper-V on 26 June 2008 as a free download. Also, a standalone version of Hyper-V exists; this version supports only x86-64 architecture.[15] While the IA-32 editions of Windows Server 2008 cannot run or install Hyper-V, they can run the MMC snap-in for managing Hyper-V.

Windows System Resource Manager[edit]
Main article: Windows System Resource Manager
Windows System Resource Manager (WSRM) is integrated into Windows Server 2008. It provides resource management and can be used to control the amount of resources a process or a user can use based on business priorities. Process Matching Criteria, which is defined by the name, type or owner of the process, enforces restrictions on the resource usage by a process that matches the criteria. CPU time, bandwidth that it can use, number of processors it can be run on, and allocated to a process can be restricted. Restrictions can be set to be imposed only on certain dates as well.

Server Manager[edit]
Server Manager is a new roles-based management tool for Windows Server 2008.[16] It is a combination of Manage Your Server and Security Configuration Wizard SCW from Windows Server 2003. Server Manager is an improvement of the Configure my server dialog that launches by default on Windows Server 2003 machines. However, rather than serve only as a starting point to configuring new roles, Server Manager gathers together all of the operations users would want to conduct on the server, such as, getting a remote deployment method set up, adding more server roles etc., and provides a consolidated, portal-like view about the status of each role.[17]

Other features[edit]
Other new or enhanced features include:

Core OS improvements[edit]
Fully multi-componentized operating system.
Improved hot patching, a feature that allows non-kernel patches to occur without the need for a reboot.
Support for being booted from Extensible Firmware Interface (EFI)-compliant firmware on x86-64 systems.
Dynamic Hardware Partitioning
Support for the hot-addition or replacement of processors and memory, on capable hardware.
Active Directory improvements[edit]
Read-only domain controllers (RODCs) in Active Directory, intended for use in branch office or other scenarios where a domain controller may reside in a low physical security environment. The RODC holds a non-writeable copy of Active Directory, and redirects all write attempts to a Full Domain Controller. It replicates all accounts except sensitive ones.[citation needed][clarification needed] In RODC mode, credentials are not cached by default. Moreover, only the replication partner of the RODC needs to run Windows Server 2008.[clarification needed] Also, local administrators can log on to the machine to perform maintenance tasks without requiring administrative rights on the domain.[citation needed]
Restartable Active Directory allows ADDS to be stopped and restarted from the Management Console or the command-line without rebooting the domain controller. This reduces downtime for offline operations and reduces overall DC servicing requirements with Server Core. ADDS is implemented as a Domain Controller Service in Windows Server 2008.
Policy related improvements[edit]
All of the Group Policy improvements from Windows Vista are included. Group Policy Management Console (GPMC) is built-in. The Group Policy objects are indexed for search and can be commented on.[18]
Policy-based networking with Network Access Protection, improved branch management and enhanced end user collaboration. Policies can be created to ensure greater Quality of Service for certain applications or services that require prioritization of network bandwidth between client and server.
Granular password settings within a single domain - ability to implement different password policies for administrative accounts on a "group" and "user" basis, instead of a single set of password settings to the whole domain.
Disk management and file storage improvements[edit]
The ability to resize hard disk partitions without stopping the server, even the system partition. This applies only to simple and spanned volumes, not to striped volumes.
Shadow Copy based block-level backup which supports optical media, network shares and Windows Recovery Environment.
DFS enhancements - SYSVOL on DFS-R, Read-only Folder Replication Member. There is also support for domain-based DFS namespaces that exceed the previous size recommendation of 5,000 folders with targets in a namespace.[19]
Several improvements to Failover Clustering (High-availability clusters).[20]
Internet Storage Naming Server (iSNS) enables central registration, deregistration and queries for iSCSI hard drives.
Protocol and cryptography improvements[edit]
Support for 128- and 256-bit AES encryption for the Kerberos authentication protocol.
New cryptography (CNG) API which supports elliptic curve cryptography and improved certificate management.
Secure Socket Tunneling Protocol, a new Microsoft proprietary VPN protocol.
AuthIP, a Microsoft proprietary extension of the IKE cryptographic protocol used in IPsec VPN networks.
Server Message Block 2.0 protocol in the new TCP/IP stack provides a number of communication enhancements, including greater performance when connecting to file shares over high-latency links and better security through the use of mutual authentication and message signing.
Miscellaneous improvements[edit]
Windows Deployment Services replacing Automated Deployment Services Windows Server 2008 home entertainment and Remote Installation Services. Windows Deployment Services (WDS) support an enhanced multicast feature when deploying operating system images.[21]
Internet Information Services 7 - Increased security, Robocopy deployment, improved diagnostic tools, delegated administration.
Windows Internal Database, a variant of SQL Server Express 2005, which serves as a common storage back-end for several other components such as Windows System Resource Manager, Windows SharePoint Services and Windows Server Update Services. It is not intended to be used by third-party applications.
An optional "Desktop Experience" component provides the same Windows Aero user interface as Windows Vista, both for local users, as well as remote users connecting through Remote Desktop.
Removed features[edit]
See also: Features removed from Windows Vista
The Open Shortest Path First (OSPF) routing protocol component in Routing and Remote Access Service was removed.[22]
Services for Macintosh, which provided file and print sharing via the now deprecated AppleTalk protocol, has been removed. Services for Macintosh were removed in Windows XP from client operating systems but were available in Windows Server 2003.[22]
NTBackup is replaced by Windows Server Backup, and no longer supports backing up to tape drives.[23] As a result of NTBackup removal, Exchange Server 2007 does not have volume snapshot backup functionality; however Exchange Server 2007 SP2 adds back an Exchange backup plug-in for Windows Server Backup which restores partial functionality.[24] Windows Small Business Server and Windows Essential Business Server both include this Exchange backup component.[25]
The POP3 service has been removed from Internet Information Services 7.0.[26] The SMTP (Simple Mail Transfer Protocol) service is not available as a server role in IIS 7.0, it is a server feature managed through IIS 6.0.
NNTP (Network News Transfer Protocol) is no longer part of Internet Information Services 7.0.
ReadyBoost is not supported.
Editions[edit]
Compared to its predecessor, most editions of Windows Server 2008 are available in x86-64 and IA-32 versions. These editions come in two DVDs: One for installing the IA-32 variant and the other for x64. Windows Server 2008 for Itanium-based Systems supports IA-64 processors. Microsoft has optimized the IA-64 version for high-workload scenarios like database servers and Line of Business (LOB) applications. As such, it is not optimized for use as a file server or media server. Microsoft has announced that Windows Server 2008 is the last 32-bit Windows server operating system.[27] Editions of Windows Server 2008 include:[28]

Windows Server 2008 Standard (IA-32 and x86-64)
Windows Server 2008 Enterprise (IA-32 and x86-64)
Windows Server 2008 Datacenter (IA-32 and x86-64)
Windows HPC Server 2008 (Codenamed "Socrates") (replacing Windows Compute Cluster Server)
Windows Web Server 2008 (IA-32 and x86-64)
Windows Storage Server 2008 (Codenamed "Magni") (IA-32 and x86-64)
Windows Small Business Server 2008 (Codenamed "Cougar") (x86-64) for small businesses
Windows Essential Business Server 2008 (Codenamed "Centro") (x86-64) for medium-sized businesses[29] (Discontinued)[30]
Windows Server 2008 for Itanium-based Systems
Windows Server 2008 Foundation (Codenamed "Lima") (x86-64) for OEMs only[31]
The Microsoft Imagine program, known as DreamSpark at the time, used to provide verified students with the 32-bit variant of Windows Server 2008 Standard Edition, but the version has since then been removed. However, they still provide the R2 release.

The Server Core feature is available in the Web, Standard, Enterprise and Datacenter editions.

Service Pack[edit]
Microsoft occasionally releases service packs for its Windows operating systems to fix bugs and also add new features.

Because Windows Server 2008 is based on the Windows NT 6.0 Service Pack 1 kernel, the RTM release is considered to be Service Pack 1; accordingly, the first service pack is called Service Pack 2. Announced on October 24, 2008,[32] this service pack contains the same changes and improvements as the Windows Vista Service Pack 2, as well as the final release of Hyper-V 1.0, and an approximate 10% reduction in power usage.

The first SP2 beta build was sent out in October 2008, a public beta arrived in December 2008, and an RC-escrow build was given to testers in January 2009. Windows Vista and Windows Server 2008 share a single service pack binary, reflecting the fact that their code bases were joined with the release of Server 2008. On May 26, 2009, Service Pack 2 was ready for release. It is now available in Windows Update.

Windows Server 2008 R2[edit]
Main article: Windows Server 2008 R2
A second release, Windows Server 2008 R2, was released on October 22, 2009.[33] Retail availability began September 14, 2009.[34] Windows Server 2008 R2 reached the RTM milestone on July 22, 2009.[35] Like Windows 7, it is built on Windows NT 6.1. New features include new virtualization features, new Active Directory features, IIS 7.5, and support for 256 logical processors. Support for 32-bit-only processors (IA-32) has been removed. On July 22, 2009, Microsoft officially announced that they had released both Windows Server 2008 R2 and Windows 7 to manufacturing. Windows Server 2008 R2 was generally available for download from MSDN and Technet on August 19 and for retail purchase from October 22, 2009.

System requirements[edit]
System requirements for Windows Server 2008 are as follows:

Criteria	2008	2008 R2
Minimum[36]	Recommended[36]	Minimum[37]	Recommended[37]
CPU
1 GHz (IA-32)
1.4 GHz (x86-64 or Itanium)
2 GHz or faster	1.4 GHz (x86-64 or Itanium)	2 GHz or faster
RAM	512 MB	2 GB or greater	512 MB	2 GB or greater
HDD[a]
Other editions, 32-bit: 20 GB
Other editions, 64-bit: 32 GB
Foundation: 10 GB[38]
40 GB or greater
Foundation: 10 GB
Other editions: 32 GB
Foundation: 10 GB or greater
Other editions: 32 GB or greater
Devices	DVD drive, 800 × 600 or higher display, keyboard and mouse
Scalability[edit]
Windows Server 2008 supports the following maximum hardware specifications:[39][40][41]

Specification	Windows Server 2008 SP2	Windows Server 2008 R2
Physical processors
("sockets")[40]
Standard: 4
Enterprise: 8
Datacenter: 32
Standard: 4
Enterprise: 8
Datacenter: 64
Logical processors
when Hyper-V is disabled[40]
IA-32: 32
x64: 64
256
Logical processors
when Hyper-V is enabled[40]
IA-32: N/A
x64: 24
64
Memory
on IA-32[41]
Standard, Web: 4 GB
Enterprise, Datacenter: 64 GB
N/A
Memory
on x64[41]
Standard, Web: 32 GB
HPC: 128 GB
Enterprise, Datacenter: 1 TB
Foundation: 8 GB
Standard, Web: 32 GB
HPC: 128 GB
Enterprise, Datacenter: 2 TB
Memory
on Itanium[41]	2 TB	2 TB

Windows Vista (codenamed Longhorn[7]) is an operating system by Microsoft for use on personal computers, including home and business desktops, laptops, tablet PCs and media center PCs. Development was completed on 8 November 2006,[2] and over the following three months, it was released in stages to computer hardware and software manufacturers, business customers and retail channels. On 30 January 2007, it was released worldwide[3] and was made available for purchase and download from the Windows Marketplace.[8] The release of Windows Vista came more than five years after the introduction of its predecessor, Windows XP, the longest time span between successive releases of Microsoft Windows desktop operating systems. It was succeeded by Windows 7, which was released to manufacturing on 22 July 2009 and released worldwide for retail on 22 October 2009.

New features of Windows Vista include an updated graphical user interface and visual style dubbed Aero, a new search component called Windows Search, redesigned networking, audio, print and display sub-systems, and new multimedia tools such as Windows DVD Maker. Vista aimed to increase the level of communication between machines on a home network, using peer-to-peer technology to simplify sharing files and media between computers and devices. Windows Vista included version 3.0 of the .NET Framework, allowing software developers to write applications without traditional Windows APIs.

Microsoft's primary stated objective with Windows Vista was to improve the state of security in the Windows operating system.[9] One common criticism of Windows XP and its predecessors was their commonly exploited security vulnerabilities and overall susceptibility to malware, viruses and buffer overflows. In light of this, Microsoft chairman Bill Gates announced in early 2002 a company-wide "Trustworthy Computing initiative", which aimed to incorporate security into every aspect of software development at the company.[10] Microsoft stated that it prioritized improving the security of Windows XP and Windows Server 2003 above finishing Windows Vista, thus delaying its completion.[11][12]

While these new features and security improvements have garnered positive reviews, Vista has also been the target of much criticism and negative press. Criticism of Windows Vista has targeted its high system requirements, its more restrictive licensing terms, the inclusion of a number of, then, new DRM technologies aimed at restricting the copying of protected digital media, lack of compatibility with some pre-Vista hardware and software, longer boot time, and the number of authorization prompts for User Account Control. As a result of these and other issues, Windows Vista had seen initial adoption and satisfaction rates lower than Windows XP.[13] However, with an estimated 330 million Internet users as of January 2009, it had been announced that Vista usage had surpassed Microsoft's pre-launch two-year-out expectations of achieving 200 million users.[14][15] At the release of Windows 7 (October 2009), Windows Vista (with approximately 400 million Internet users) was the second most widely used operating system on the Internet with an approximately 19% market share, the most widely used being Windows XP with an approximately 63% market share.[16] In May 2010, Windows Vista's market share had an estimated range from 15% to 26%.[17][18] On 22 October 2010, Microsoft ceased sales of retail copies of Windows Vista, and the OEM sales for Vista ceased a year later.[19] As of September 2017, Vista's market share was 0.43%.[20]

Microsoft stopped providing extended support for Windows Vista on 11 April 2017.[6][21]

Contents  [hide]
1	Development
1.1	As Longhorn
1.2	Development reset
1.3	As Windows Vista
2	New or changed features
2.1	End-user
2.2	Core
2.3	Security-related
2.4	System management
2.5	Developer
2.6	Installation
3	Removed features
4	Editions
5	Visual styles
6	Hardware requirements
6.1	Physical memory limits
6.2	Processor limits
7	Updates
7.1	Service Pack 1
7.2	Service Pack 2
7.3	Platform Update
8	Marketing campaign
8.1	The Mojave Experiment
9	Reception
9.1	Sales
10	Criticism
10.1	Hardware requirements
10.2	Licensing
10.3	Cost
10.4	DRM
10.5	User Account Control
11	Downgrade rights
12	See also
13	References
Development
Main article: Development of Windows Vista
As Longhorn
Microsoft began work on Windows Vista, known at the time by its codename Longhorn, in May 2001,[22] five months before the release of Windows XP. It was originally expected to ship sometime late in 2003 as a minor step between Windows XP and Blackcomb, which was planned to be the company's next major operating system release. Gradually, "Longhorn" assimilated many of the important new features and technologies slated for Blackcomb, resulting in the release date being pushed back several times in 3 years. In some builds of Longhorn, their license agreement said "For the Microsoft product codenamed "Whistler"". Many of Microsoft's developers were also re-tasked to build updates to Windows XP and Windows Server 2003 to strengthen security. Faced with ongoing delays and concerns about feature creep, Microsoft announced on 27 August 2004, that it had revised its plans. For this reason, Longhorn was reset to start work on componentizing the Windows Server 2003 Service Pack 1 codebase, and over time re-incorporating the features that would be intended for an actual operating system release. However, some previously announced features such as WinFS were dropped or postponed, and a new software development methodology called the Security Development Lifecycle was incorporated in an effort to address concerns with the security of the Windows codebase, which is programmed in C, C++ and assembly. Longhorn became known as Vista in 2005.[23][24]

The early development stages of Longhorn were generally characterized by incremental improvements and updates to Windows XP. During this period, Microsoft was fairly quiet about what was being worked on, as their marketing and public relations focus was more strongly focused on Windows XP, and Windows Server 2003, which was released in April 2003. Occasional builds of Longhorn were leaked onto popular file sharing networks such as IRC, BitTorrent, eDonkey and various newsgroups, and so most of what is known about builds prior to the first sanctioned development release of Longhorn in May 2003, is derived from these builds.

After several months of relatively little news or activity from Microsoft with Longhorn, Microsoft released Build 4008, which had made an appearance on the Internet around 28 February 2003.[25] It was also privately handed out to a select group of software developers. As an evolutionary release over build 3683, it contained a number of small improvements, including a modified blue "Plex" theme and a new, simplified Windows Image-based installer that operates in graphical mode from the outset, and completed an install of the operating system in approximately one third the time of Windows XP on the same hardware. An optional "new taskbar" was introduced that was thinner than the previous build and displayed the time differently.

The most notable visual and functional difference, however, came with Windows Explorer. The incorporation of the Plex theme made blue the dominant color of the entire application. The Windows XP-style task pane was almost completely replaced with a large horizontal pane that appeared under the toolbars. A new search interface allowed for filtering of results, searching of Windows help, and natural-language queries that would be used to integrate with WinFS. The animated search characters were also removed. The "view modes" were also replaced with a single slider that would resize the icons in real-time, in list, thumbnail, or details mode, depending on where the slider was. File metadata was also made more visible and more easily editable, with more active encouragement to fill out missing pieces of information. Also of note was the conversion of Windows Explorer to being a .NET application.

Most builds of Longhorn and Vista were identified by a label that was always displayed in the bottom-right corner of the desktop. A typical build label would look like "Longhorn Build 3663.Lab06_N.020728-1728". Higher build numbers did not automatically mean that the latest features from every development team at Microsoft was included. Typically, a team working on a certain feature or subsystem would generate their own working builds which developers would test with, and when the code was deemed stable, all the changes would be incorporated back into the main development tree at once. At Microsoft, a number of "Build labs" exist where the compilation of the entirety of Windows can be performed by a team. The name of the lab in which any given build originated is shown as part of the build label, and the date and time of the build follows that. Some builds (such as Beta 1 and Beta 2) only display the build label in the version information dialog (Winver). The icons used in these builds are from Windows XP.

At the Windows Hardware Engineering Conference (WinHEC) in May 2003, Microsoft gave their first public demonstrations of the new Desktop Window Manager and Aero. The demonstrations were done on a revised build 4015 which was never released. A number of sessions for developers and hardware engineers at the conference focused on these new features, as well as the Next-Generation Secure Computing Base (previously known as "Palladium"), which at the time was Microsoft's proposed solution for creating a secure computing environment whereby any given component of the system could be deemed "trusted". Also at this conference, Microsoft reiterated their roadmap for delivering Longhorn, pointing to an "early 2005" release date.[26]

Development reset
By 2004, it had become obvious to the Windows team at Microsoft that they were losing sight of what needed to be done to complete the next version of Windows and ship it to customers. Internally, some Microsoft employees were describing the Longhorn project as "another Cairo" or "Cairo.NET", referring to the Cairo development project that the company embarked on through the first half of the 1990s, which never resulted in a shipping operating system (though nearly all the technologies developed in that time did end up in Windows 95 and Windows NT.[27]) Microsoft was shocked in 2005 by Apple's release of Mac OS X Tiger. It offered only a limited subset of features planned for Longhorn, in particular fast file searching and integrated graphics and sound processing, but appeared to have impressive reliability and performance compared to contemporary Longhorn builds.[28] Most Longhorn builds had major Explorer.exe system leaks which prevented the OS from performing well, and added more confusion to the development teams in later builds with more and more code being developed which failed to reach stability.

In a 23 September 2005 front-page article on The Wall Street Journal,[29] Microsoft co-president Jim Allchin, who had overall responsibility for the development and delivery of Windows, explained how development of Longhorn had been "crashing into the ground" due in large part to the haphazard methods by which features were introduced and integrated into the core of the operating system, without a clear focus on an end-product. Allchin went on to explain how in December 2003, he enlisted the help of two other senior executives, Brian Valentine and Amitabh Srivastava, the former being experienced with shipping software at Microsoft, most notably Windows Server 2003,[30] and the latter having spent his career at Microsoft researching and developing methods of producing high-quality testing systems.[31] Srivastava employed a team of core architects to visually map out the entirety of the Windows operating system, and to proactively work towards a development process that would enforce high levels of code quality, reduce interdependencies between components, and in general, "not make things worse with Vista".[32] Since Microsoft decided that Longhorn needed to be further componentized, work started on the Omega-13 series builds where they would componentize existing Windows Server 2003 source code, and over time add back functionality as development progressed. Future Longhorn builds would start from Windows Server 2003 Service Pack 1 and continue from there.

This change, announced internally to Microsoft employees on 26 August 2004, began in earnest in September, though it would take several more months before the new development process and build methodology would be used by all of the development teams. A number of complaints came from individual developers, and Bill Gates himself, that the new development process was going to be prohibitively difficult to work within.

As Windows Vista
By approximately November 2004, the company had considered several names for the final release, ranging from simple to fanciful and inventive. In the end, Microsoft chose Windows Vista as confirmed on 22 July 2005, believing it to be a "wonderful intersection of what the product really does, what Windows stands for, and what resonates with customers, and their needs." Group Project Manager Greg Sullivan told Paul Thurrott "You want the PC to adapt to you and help you cut through the clutter to focus on what's important to you. That's what Windows Vista is all about: "bringing clarity to your world." (a reference to the three marketing points of Vista—Clear, Connected, Confident), so you can focus on what matters to you.".[33] Microsoft co-president Jim Allchin also loved the name, saying that "Vista" creates the right imagery for the new product capabilities and inspires the imagination with all the possibilities of what can be done with Windows—making people's passions come alive."[34]

After Longhorn was named Windows Vista in November 2004, an unprecedented beta-test program was started, involving hundreds of thousands of volunteers and companies. In September of that year, Microsoft started releasing regular Community Technology Previews (CTP) to beta testers from July 2005 to February 2006. The first of these was distributed at the 2005 Microsoft Professional Developers Conference, and was subsequently released to beta testers and Microsoft Developer Network subscribers. The builds that followed incorporated most of the planned features for the final product, as well as a number of changes to the user interface, based largely on feedback from beta testers. Windows Vista was deemed feature-complete with the release of the "February CTP," released on 22 February 2006, and much of the remainder of the work between that build and the final release of the product focused on stability, performance, application and driver compatibility, and documentation. Beta 2, released in late May, was the first build to be made available to the general public through Microsoft's Customer Preview Program. It was downloaded by over five million people. Two release candidates followed in September and October, both of which were made available to a large number of users.[35]

At the Intel Developer Forum on 9 March 2006, Microsoft announced a change in their plans to support EFI in Windows Vista. The UEFI 2.0 specification (which replaces EFI 1.10) was not completed until early 2006, and at the time of Microsoft's announcement, no firmware manufacturers had completed a production implementation which could be used for testing. As a result, the decision was made to postpone the introduction of UEFI support to Windows; support for UEFI on 64-bit platforms was postponed until Vista Service Pack 1 and Windows Server 2008 and 32-bit UEFI would not be supported, as Microsoft does not expect many such systems to be built as the market moves to 64-bit processors.[36][37]

While Microsoft had originally hoped to have the consumer versions of the operating system available worldwide in time for Christmas 2006, it announced in March 2006 that the release date would be pushed back to January 2007 in order to give the company—and the hardware and software companies that Microsoft depends on for providing device drivers—additional time to prepare. Because a release to manufacturing (RTM) build is the final version of code shipped to retailers and other distributors, the purpose of a pre-RTM build is to eliminate any last "show-stopper" bugs that may prevent the code from responsibly being shipped to customers, as well as anything else that consumers may find annoying. Thus, it is unlikely that any major new features would be introduced; instead, work would focus on Vista's "fit-and-finish". In just a few days, developers had managed to drop Vista's bug count from over 2470 on 22 September to just over 1400 by the time RC2 shipped in early October. However, they still had a way to go before Vista was ready to RTM. Microsoft's internal processes required Vista's bug count to drop to 500 or fewer before the product could go into escrow for RTM.[38] For most of the pre-RTM builds, those 32-bit editions are only released.

On 14 June 2006, Windows developer Philip Su posted a blog entry which decried the development process of Windows Vista, stating that "The code is way too complicated, and that the pace of coding has been tremendously slowed down by overbearing process."[39] The same post also described Windows Vista as having approximately 50 million lines of code, with about 2,000 developers working on the product. During a demonstration of the speech recognition feature new to Windows Vista at Microsoft's Financial Analyst Meeting on 27 July 2006, the software recognized the phrase "Dear mom" as "Dear aunt". After several failed attempts to correct the error, the sentence eventually became "Dear aunt, let's set so double the killer delete select all".[40] A developer with Vista's speech recognition team later explained that there was a bug with the build of Vista that was causing the microphone gain level to be set very high, resulting in the audio being received by the speech recognition software being "incredibly distorted".[41]

Windows Vista build 5824 (17 October 2006) was supposed to be the RTM release, but a bug, which destroyed any system that was upgraded from Windows XP, prevented this, damaging development and lowering the chance that it would hit its January 2007 deadline.[42]

Development of Windows Vista came to an end when Microsoft announced that it had been finalized on 8 November 2006, and was concluded by co-president of Windows development, Jim Allchin.[43] The RTM's build number had also jumped to 6000 to reflect Vista's internal version number, NT 6.0.[44] Jumping RTM build numbers is common practice among consumer-oriented Windows versions, like Windows 98 (build 1998), Windows 98 SE (build 2222), Windows Me (build 3000) or Windows XP (build 2600), as compared to the business-oriented versions like Windows 2000 (build 2195) or Server 2003 (build 3790). On 16 November 2006, Microsoft made the final build available to MSDN and Technet Plus subscribers.[45] A business-oriented Enterprise edition was made available to volume license customers on 30 November.[46] Windows Vista was launched for general customer availability on 30 January 2007.

New or changed features
Main article: Features new to Windows Vista
Windows Vista introduced several features and functionality not present in its predecessors.

End-user
Windows Aero: The new graphical user interface is named Windows Aero, which Jim Allchin stated is an acronym for Authentic, Energetic, Reflective, and Open.[47] Microsoft intended the new interface to be cleaner and more aesthetically pleasing than those of previous Windows versions, featuring new transparencies, live thumbnails, live icons, and animations, thus providing a new level of eye candy. Laptop users report, however, that enabling Aero shortens battery life[48][49] and reduces performance.
Windows shell: The new Windows shell offers a new range of organization, navigation, and search capabilities: Task panes in Windows Explorer are removed, integrating the relevant task options into the toolbar. A "Favorite links" pane has been added, enabling one-click access to common directories. A search box appears in every Explorer window. The address bar has been replaced with a breadcrumb navigation bar. Icons of certain file types in Windows Explorer are "live" and can be scaled in size up to 256 × 256 pixels. The preview pane allows users to see thumbnails of various files and view the contents of documents. The details pane shows information such as file size and type, and allows viewing and editing of embedded tags in supported file formats. The Start menu has changed as well; incorporating an instant search box, and the All Programs list uses a horizontal scroll bar instead of the cascading flyout menu seen in Windows XP. The word "Start" itself has been removed in favor of a blue orb that bears the Windows logo.
Windows Search: A new search component of Windows Vista, it features instant search (also known as search as you type), which provides instant search results, thus finding files more quickly than the search features found in previous versions of Windows and can search the contents of recognized file types.[50] Users can search for certain metadata such as name, extension, size, date or attributes.
Windows Sidebar: A transparent panel, anchored to the right side of the screen, wherein a user can place Desktop Gadgets, which are small applets designed for a specialized purpose (such as displaying the weather or sports scores). Gadgets can also be placed on the desktop.[51]
Windows Internet Explorer 7: New user interface, tabbed browsing, RSS, a search box, improved printing,[52] Page Zoom, Quick Tabs (thumbnails of all open tabs), Anti-Phishing filter, a number of new security protection features, Internationalized Domain Name support (IDN), and improved web standards support. IE7 in Windows Vista runs in isolation from other applications in the operating system (protected mode); exploits and malicious software are restricted from writing to any location beyond Temporary Internet Files without explicit user consent.
Windows Media Player 11, a major revamp of Microsoft's program for playing and organizing music and video. New features in this version include word wheeling (incremental search or "search as you type"), a new GUI for the media library, photo display and organization, the ability to share music libraries over a network with other Windows Vista machines, Xbox 360 integration, and support for other Media Center Extenders.
Windows Defender: An antispyware program with several real-time protection agents. It includes a software explorer feature, which provides access to startup programs, and allows one to view currently running software, network connected applications, and Winsock providers (Winsock LSPs).
Backup and Restore Center: Includes a backup and restore application that gives users the ability to schedule periodic backups of files on their computer, as well as recovery from previous backups. Backups are incremental, storing only the changes made each time, minimizing disk usage. It also features Complete PC Backup (available only in the Ultimate, Business, and Enterprise versions), which backs up an entire computer as an image onto a hard disk or DVD. Complete PC Backup can automatically recreate a machine setup onto new hardware or hard disk in case of any hardware failures. Complete PC Restore can be initiated from within Windows Vista or from the Windows Vista installation CD in the event that a PC is so corrupt that it cannot start normally from the hard disk.
Windows Mail: A replacement for Outlook Express that includes a new mail store that improves stability,[53] and features integrated instant search. It has the Phishing Filter like Internet Explorer 7 and Junk mail filtering that is enhanced through regular updates via Windows Update.[54]
Windows Calendar is a new calendar and task application which integrates with Windows Contacts and Windows Mail. It is compatible with various calendar file types, such as the popular iCalendar.
Windows Photo Gallery, a photo and movie library management application. It can import from digital cameras, tag and rate individual items, adjust colors and exposure, create and display slideshows (with pan and fade effects) through Direct3D and burn slideshows to a DVD.
Windows DVD Maker, a companion program to Windows Movie Maker that provides the ability to create video DVDs based on a user's content. Users can design a DVD with title, menus, video, soundtrack, pan and zoom motion effects on pictures or slides.
Windows Media Center, which was previously exclusively bundled in a separate version of Windows XP, known as Windows XP Media Center Edition, has been incorporated into the Home Premium and Ultimate editions of Windows Vista.
Games: Most of the standard computer games included in previous versions of Windows have been redesigned to showcase Vista's new graphical capabilities. New games available in Windows Vista are Chess Titans (3D Chess game), Mahjong Titans (3D Mahjong game), and Purble Place (a small collection of games, oriented towards younger children, including a matching game, a cake-creator game, and a dress-up puzzle game). Purble Place is the only one of the new games available in the Windows Vista Home Basic edition.
Games Explorer: A new special folder called "Games" exposes installed video games and information about them. These metadata may be updated from the Internet.[55]
Windows Mobility Center is a control panel that centralizes the most relevant information related to mobile computing (brightness, sound, battery level / power scheme selection, wireless network, screen orientation, presentation settings, etc.).
Windows Fax and Scan Allows computers with fax modems to send and receive fax documents, as well as scan documents. It is not available in the Home versions of Windows Vista, but is available in the Business, Enterprise and Ultimate editions.
Windows Meeting Space replaces NetMeeting. Users can share applications (or their entire desktop) with other users on the local network, or over the Internet using peer-to-peer technology (higher versions than Starter and Home Basic can take advantage of hosting capabilities, Starter and Home Basic editions are limited to "join" mode only)
Windows HotStart enables compatible computers to start applications directly from operating system startup or resume by the press of a button—this enables what Microsoft has described as appliance-like availability, which allows computers to function in a manner similar to a consumer electronics device such as a DVD player;[56] the feature was also designed to provide the instant-on feature availability that is traditionally associated with mobile devices.[57] While Microsoft has emphasized multimedia scenarios with Windows HotStart,[58] a user can configure this feature so that a button launches a preferred application.[59]
Shadow Copy automatically creates daily backup copies of files and folders. Users can also create "shadow copies" by setting a System Protection Point using the System Protection tab in the System control panel. The user can view multiple versions of a file throughout a limited history and be allowed to restore, delete, or copy those versions. This feature is available only in the Business, Enterprise, and Ultimate editions of Windows Vista and is inherited from Windows Server 2003.[60]
Windows Update: Software and security updates have been simplified,[61] now operating solely via a control panel instead of as a web application. Windows Mail's spam filter and Windows Defender's definitions are updated automatically via Windows Update. Users who choose the recommended setting for Automatic Updates will have the latest drivers installed and available when they add a new device.
Parental controls: Allows administrators to monitor and restrict user activity, as well as control which websites, programs and games each Standard user can use and install. This feature is not included in the Business or Enterprise editions of Vista.
Windows SideShow: Enables the auxiliary displays on newer laptops or on supported Windows Mobile devices. It is meant to be used to display device gadgets while the computer is on or off.
Speech recognition is integrated into Vista.[62] It features a redesigned user interface and configurable command-and-control commands. Unlike the Office 2003 version, which works only in Office and WordPad, Speech Recognition in Windows Vista works for any accessible application. In addition, it currently supports several languages: British and American English, Spanish, French, German, Chinese (Traditional and Simplified) and Japanese.
New fonts, including several designed for screen reading, and improved Chinese (Yahei, JhengHei), Japanese (Meiryo), and Korean (Malgun) fonts. ClearType has also been enhanced and enabled by default.
Improved audio controls allow the system-wide volume or volume of individual audio devices and even individual applications to be controlled separately. New audio functionalities such as room correction, bass management, speaker fill, and headphone virtualization have also been incorporated.
Problem Reports and Solutions, a feature that allows users to check for solutions to problems or view previously sent problems for any solutions or additional information, if available.
Windows System Assessment Tool is a tool used to benchmark system performance. Software such as games can retrieve this rating and modify its own behavior at runtime to improve performance. The benchmark tests CPU, RAM, 2-D and 3-D graphics acceleration, graphics memory and hard disk space.[63][64]
Windows Ultimate Extras: The Ultimate edition of Windows Vista provides, via Windows Update, access to some additional features. These are a collection of additional MUI language packs, Texas Hold 'Em (a Poker game) and Microsoft Tinker (a strategy game where the character is a robot), BitLocker and EFS enhancements that allow users to back up their encryption key online in a Digital Locker, and Windows Dreamscene, which enables the use of videos in MPEG and WMV formats as the desktop background. On 21 April 2008, Microsoft launched two more Ultimate Extras; three new Windows sound schemes, and a content pack for Dreamscene. Various DreamScene Content Packs have been released since the final version of DreamScene was released.
Reliability and Performance Monitor includes various tools for tuning and monitoring system performance and resources activities of CPU, disks, network, memory and other resources. It shows the operations on files, the opened connections, etc.[65]
Disk Management: The Logical Disk Manager in Windows Vista supports shrinking and expanding volumes on-the-fly.[66]
Windows Anytime Upgrade: is a program that allows a user to upgrade their computer running Vista to a higher edition. For example, a computer running Windows Vista Home Basic can be upgraded to Home Premium or better. Anytime Upgrade permits users to upgrade without having their programs and data erased, and is cheaper than replacing the existing installation of Windows. Anytime Upgrade is no longer available for Vista.[67]
Digital Locker Assistant: A program that facilitated access to downloads and purchases from the Windows Marketplace digital distribution platform.[68] Apps purchased from Windows Marketplace are managed by Microsoft Account credentials, which are used to access a user's digital locker that stores the app and its associated information (e.g., licenses) off-site.[69]
Core
Main article: Technical features new to Windows Vista
Vista includes technologies such as ReadyBoost[70] and ReadyDrive, which employ fast flash memory (located on USB flash drives and hybrid hard disk drives) to improve system performance by caching commonly used programs and data. This manifests itself in improved battery life on notebook computers as well, since a hybrid drive can be spun down when not in use.[71] Another new technology called SuperFetch utilizes machine learning techniques to analyze usage patterns to allow Windows Vista to make intelligent decisions about what content should be present in system memory at any given time. It uses almost all the extra RAM as disk cache.[72] In conjunction with SuperFetch, an automatic built-in Windows Disk Defragmenter makes sure that those applications are strategically positioned on the hard disk where they can be loaded into memory very quickly with the least amount of physical movement of the hard disk's read-write heads.[73]

As part of the redesign of the networking architecture, IPv6 has been fully incorporated into the operating system[74] and a number of performance improvements have been introduced, such as TCP window scaling.[75] Earlier versions of Windows typically needed third-party wireless networking software to work properly, but this is not the case with Vista, which includes more comprehensive wireless networking support.[76]

For graphics, Vista introduces a new Windows Display Driver Model[77] and a major revision to Direct3D. The new driver model facilitates the new Desktop Window Manager, which provides the tearing-free desktop and special effects that are the cornerstones of Windows Aero. Direct3D 10, developed in conjunction with major graphics card manufacturers, is a new architecture with more advanced shader support, and allows the graphics processing unit to render more complex scenes without assistance from the CPU. It features improved load balancing between CPU and GPU and also optimizes data transfer between them.[78] WDDM also provides video content playback that rivals typical consumer electronics devices. It does this by making it easy to connect to external monitors, providing for protected HD video playback and increasing overall video playback quality. For the first time in Windows, graphics processing unit (GPU) multitasking is possible, enabling users to run more than one GPU-intensive application simultaneously.[79]

At the core of the operating system, many improvements have been made to the memory manager, process scheduler and I/O scheduler. The Heap Manager implements additional features such as integrity checking in order to improve robustness and defend against buffer overflow security exploits, although this comes at the price of breaking backward compatibility with some legacy applications.[80] A Kernel Transaction Manager has been implemented that enables applications to work with the file system and Registry using atomic transaction operations.[81]

Security-related
Main article: Security and safety features new to Windows Vista
Improved security was a primary design goal for Vista.[9] Microsoft's Trustworthy Computing initiative, which aims to improve public trust in its products, has had a direct effect on its development. This effort has resulted in a number of new security and safety features and an Evaluation Assurance Level rating of 4+.[82][83]

User Account Control, or UAC is perhaps the most significant and visible of these changes. UAC is a security technology that makes it possible for users to use their computer with fewer privileges by default, with a view to stopping malware from making unauthorized changes to the system. This was often difficult in previous versions of Windows, as the previous "limited" user accounts proved too restrictive and incompatible with a large proportion of application software, and even prevented some basic operations such as looking at the calendar from the notification tray. In Windows Vista, when an action is performed that requires administrative rights (such as installing/uninstalling software or making system-wide configuration changes), the user is first prompted for an administrator name and password; in cases where the user is already an administrator, the user is still prompted to confirm the pending privileged action. Regular use of the computer such as running programs, printing, or surfing the Internet does not trigger UAC prompts. User Account Control asks for credentials in a Secure Desktop mode, in which the entire screen is dimmed, and only the authorization window is active and highlighted. The intent is to stop a malicious program misleading the user by interfering with the authorization window, and to hint to the user the importance of the prompt.[84]

Testing by Symantec Corporation has proven the effectiveness of UAC. Symantec used over 2,000 active malware samples, consisting of backdoors, keyloggers, rootkits, mass mailers, trojan horses, spyware, adware, and various other samples. Each was executed on a default Windows Vista installation within a standard user account. UAC effectively blocked over 50 percent of each threat, excluding rootkits. 5 percent or less of the malware that evaded UAC survived a reboot.[85]

Internet Explorer 7's new security and safety features include a phishing filter, IDN with anti-spoofing capabilities, and integration with system-wide parental controls. For added security, ActiveX controls are disabled by default. Also, Internet Explorer operates in a protected mode, which operates with lower permissions than the user and runs in isolation from other applications in the operating system, preventing it from accessing or modifying anything besides the Temporary Internet Files directory.[86] Microsoft's anti-spyware product, Windows Defender, has been incorporated into Windows, providing protection against malware and other threats. Changes to various system configuration settings (such as new auto-starting applications) are blocked unless the user gives consent.

Whereas prior releases of Windows supported per-file encryption using Encrypting File System, the Enterprise and Ultimate editions of Vista include BitLocker Drive Encryption, which can protect entire volumes, notably the operating system volume. However, BitLocker requires approximately a 1.5-gigabyte partition to be permanently not encrypted and to contain system files in order for Windows to boot. In normal circumstances, the only time this partition is accessed is when the computer is booting, or when there is a Windows update that changes files in this area, which is a legitimate reason to access this section of the drive. The area can be a potential security issue, because a hexadecimal editor (such as dskprobe.exe), or malicious software running with administrator and/or kernel level privileges would be able to write to this "Ghost Partition" and allow a piece of malicious software to compromise the system, or disable the encryption. BitLocker can work in conjunction with a Trusted Platform Module (TPM) cryptoprocessor (version 1.2) embedded in a computer's motherboard, or with a USB key.[87] However, as with other full disk encryption technologies, BitLocker is vulnerable to a cold boot attack, especially where TPM is used as a key protector without a boot PIN being required too.[88]

A variety of other privilege-restriction techniques are also built into Vista. An example is the concept of "integrity levels" in user processes, whereby a process with a lower integrity level cannot interact with processes of a higher integrity level and cannot perform DLL–injection to a processes of a higher integrity level. The security restrictions of Windows services are more fine-grained, so that services (especially those listening on the network) have no ability to interact with parts of the operating system they do not need to. Obfuscation techniques such as address space layout randomization are used to increase the amount of effort required of malware before successful infiltration of a system. Code Integrity verifies that system binaries have not been tampered with by malicious code.

As part of the redesign of the network stack, Windows Firewall has been upgraded, with new support for filtering both incoming and outgoing traffic. Advanced packet filter rules can be created that can grant or deny communications to specific services.

The 64-bit versions of Vista require that all device drivers be digitally signed, so that the creator of the driver can be identified.[89]

System management
Main article: Management features new to Windows Vista
While much of the focus of Vista's new capabilities highlighted the new user-interface,[90] security technologies, and improvements to the core operating system, Microsoft also adding new deployment and maintenance features:

The Windows Imaging Format (WIM) provides the cornerstone of Microsoft's new deployment and packaging system. WIM files, which contain a HAL-independent image of Windows Vista, can be maintained and patched without having to rebuild new images. Windows Images can be delivered via Systems Management Server or Business Desktop Deployment technologies. Images can be customized and configured with applications then deployed to corporate client personal computers using little to no touch by a system administrator. ImageX is the Microsoft tool used to create and customize images.
Windows Deployment Services replaces Remote Installation Services for deploying Vista and prior versions of Windows.
Approximately 700 new Group Policy settings have been added, covering most aspects of the new features in the operating system, as well as significantly expanding the configurability of wireless networks, removable storage devices, and user desktop experience. Vista also introduced an XML-based format (ADMX) to display registry-based policy settings, making it easier to manage networks that span geographic locations and different languages.[91]
Services for UNIX, renamed as "Subsystem for UNIX-based Applications", comes with the Enterprise and Ultimate editions of Vista. Network File System (NFS) client support is also included.
Multilingual User Interface–Unlike previous versions of Windows (which required the loading of language packs to provide local-language support), Windows Vista Ultimate and Enterprise editions support the ability to dynamically change languages based on the logged-on user's preference.
Wireless Projector support
Developer
Windows Vista includes a large number of new application programming interfaces. Chief among them is the inclusion of version 3.0 of the .NET Framework, which consists of a class library and Common Language Runtime and OS/2 environment just like its NT predecessors. Version 3.0 includes four new major components:[92]

Windows Presentation Foundation is a user interface subsystem and framework based vector graphics, which makes use of 3D computer graphics hardware and Direct3D technologies. It provides the foundation for building applications and blending together application UI, documents, and media content. It is the successor to Windows Forms.
Windows Communication Foundation is a service-oriented messaging subsystem that enables applications and systems to interoperate locally or remotely using Web services.
Windows Workflow Foundation provides task automation and integrated transactions using workflows. It is the programming model, engine and tools for building workflow-enabled applications on Windows.
Windows CardSpace is a component that securely stores digital identities of a person, and provides a unified interface for choosing the identity for a particular transaction, such as logging into a website.[93]
These technologies are also available for Windows XP and Windows Server 2003 to facilitate their introduction to and usage by developers and end users.

There are also significant new development APIs in the core of the operating system, notably the completely re-designed audio, networking, print, and video interfaces, major changes to the security infrastructure, improvements to the deployment and installation of applications ("ClickOnce" and Windows Installer 4.0), new device driver development model ("Windows Driver Foundation"), Transactional NTFS, mobile computing API advancements (power management, Tablet PC Ink support, SideShow) and major updates to (or complete replacements of) many core subsystems such as Winlogon and CAPI.

There are some issues for software developers using some of the graphics APIs in Vista. Games or programs built solely on the Windows Vista-exclusive version of DirectX, version 10, cannot work on prior versions of Windows, as DirectX 10 is not available for previous Windows versions. Also, games that require the features of D3D9Ex, the updated implementation of DirectX 9 in Windows Vista are also incompatible with previous Windows versions.[94] According to a Microsoft blog, there are three choices for OpenGL implementation on Vista. An application can use the default implementation, which translates OpenGL calls into the Direct3D API and is frozen at OpenGL version 1.4, or an application can use an Installable Client Driver (ICD), which comes in two flavors: legacy and Vista-compatible. A legacy ICD disables the Desktop Window Manager, a Vista-compatible ICD takes advantage of a new API, and is fully compatible with the Desktop Window Manager.[95] At least two primary vendors, ATI and NVIDIA provided full Vista-compatible ICDs.[96] However, hardware overlay is not supported, because it is considered as an obsolete feature in Vista. ATI and NVIDIA strongly recommend using compositing desktop/Framebuffer Objects for same functionality.[97]

Installation
Windows Vista is the first Microsoft operating system:

to use DVD-ROM media for installation[98]
that can be installed only on a partition formatted with the NTFS file system[99]
that provides support for loading drivers for SCSI, SATA and RAID controllers from any source other than floppy disks prior to its installation.[100]
Removed features
Main article: List of features removed in Windows Vista
Some notable Windows XP features and components have been replaced or removed in Windows Vista, including several shell and Windows Explorer features, multimedia features, networking related functionality, Windows Messenger, NTBackup, the network Windows Messenger service, HyperTerminal, MSN Explorer, Active Desktop, and the replacement of NetMeeting with Windows Meeting Space. Windows Vista also does not include the Windows XP "Luna" visual theme, or most of the classic color schemes that have been part of Windows since the Windows 3.x era. The "Hardware profiles" startup feature has also been removed, along with support for older motherboard technologies like the EISA bus, APM and Game port support (though on the 32-bit version game port support can be enabled by applying an older driver).[101] IP over FireWire (TCP/IP over IEEE 1394) has been removed as well.[102] The IPX/SPX protocol has also been removed, although it can be enabled by a third-party plug-in.[103]

Editions
Main article: Windows Vista editions
Windows Vista shipped in six different editions.[104] These are roughly divided into two target markets, consumer and business, with editions varying to cater for specific sub-markets. For consumers, there are three editions, with two available for economically more developed countries. Windows Vista Starter edition is aimed for low powered computers with availability only in emerging markets. Windows Vista Home Basic is intended for budget users. Windows Vista Home Premium covers the majority of the consumer market, and contains applications for creating and using multimedia. The home editions cannot join a Windows Server domain. For businesses, there are three editions as well. Windows Vista Business is specifically designed for small and medium-sized enterprises,[105] while Windows Vista Enterprise[106] is only available to customers participating in Microsoft's Software Assurance program. Windows Vista Ultimate contains the complete feature-set of both the Home and Business (combination of both Home Premium and Enterprise) editions, as well as a set of Windows Ultimate Extras, and is aimed at enthusiasts.

All editions except Windows Vista Starter support both 32-bit (x32) and 64-bit (x64) processor architectures.

In the European Union, Home Basic N and Business N versions are also available. These come without Windows Media Player, due to EU sanctions brought against Microsoft for violating anti-trust laws. Similar sanctions exist in South Korea.

Visual styles

A comparison of the four visual styles included in Windows Vista
Windows Vista has four distinct visual styles.[107][108]

Windows Aero
Vista's default visual style, Windows Aero, is built on a new desktop composition engine called Desktop Window Manager. Windows Aero introduces support for translucency effects (Glass), live thumbnails, window animations, and other visual effects (for example Windows Flip 3D), and is intended for mainstream and high-end video cards. To enable these features, the contents of every open window are stored in video memory to facilitate tearing-free movement of windows. As such, Windows Aero has significantly higher hardware requirements than its predecessors. The minimum requirement is for 128 MB of graphics memory, depending on resolution used.[109] Windows Aero (including Windows Flip 3D) is not included in the Starter and Home Basic editions.
Windows Vista Standard
This style is a variation of Windows Aero without the glass effects, window animations, and other advanced graphical effects such as Windows Flip 3D.[110] Like Windows Aero, it uses the Desktop Window Manager, and has generally the same video hardware requirements as Windows Aero. This visual style is included with Home Basic edition only as a "cheap" replacement of Windows Aero style.
Windows Vista Basic
This style has aspects that are similar to Windows XP's "Luna" visual style with the addition of subtle animations such as those found on progress bars. It does not employ the Desktop Window Manager, as such, it does not feature transparency or translucency, window animation, Windows Flip 3D or any of the functions provided by the DWM. The Basic mode does not require the new Windows Display Driver Model (WDDM) for display drivers, and has similar video card requirements to Windows XP. For computers with video cards that are not powerful enough to support Windows Aero, this is the default graphics mode. Prior to Service Pack 1, a machine that failed Windows Genuine Advantage validation would also default to this visual style.[111]
Windows Standard
The Windows Standard (or Windows Classic) visual style is similar to that of Windows 9x, Windows 2000 and Microsoft's Windows Server line of operating systems. It does not use the Desktop Window Manager, and does not require a WDDM driver. As with previous versions of Windows, this visual style supports color schemes, which are collections of color settings. Windows Vista includes six color schemes: four high-contrast color schemes and the default color schemes from Windows 98 (titled "Windows Classic") and Windows 2000/Windows Me (titled "Windows Standard").[110]
Hardware requirements
Computers capable of running Windows Vista are classified as Vista Capable and Vista Premium Ready.[112] A Vista Capable or equivalent PC is capable of running all editions of Windows Vista although some of the special features and high-end graphics options may require additional or more advanced hardware. A Vista Premium Ready PC can take advantage of Vista's high-end features.[113]

Windows Vista's Basic and Classic interfaces work with virtually any graphics hardware that supports Windows XP or 2000; accordingly, most discussion around Vista's graphics requirements centers on those for the Windows Aero interface. As of Windows Vista Beta 2, the NVIDIA GeForce 6 series and later, the ATI Radeon 9500 and later, Intel's GMA 950 and later integrated graphics, and a handful of VIA chipsets and S3 Graphics discrete chips are supported. Although originally supported, the GeForce FX 5 series has been dropped from newer drivers from NVIDIA. The last driver from NVIDIA to support the GeForce FX series on Vista was 96.85.[114][115] Microsoft offered a tool called the Windows Vista Upgrade Advisor[113] to assist Windows XP and Vista users in determining what versions of Windows their machine is capable of running. The required server connections for this utility are no longer available. Although the installation media included in retail packages is a 32-bit DVD, customers needing a CD-ROM or customers who wish for a 64-bit install media are able to acquire this media through the Windows Vista Alternate Media program.[116] The Ultimate edition includes both 32-bit and 64-bit media.[117] The digitally downloaded version of Ultimate includes only one version, either 32-bit or 64-bit, from Windows Marketplace.

Windows Vista system requirements[118]
Component of PC	Minimum required	Recommended
Processor	800 MHz	1 GHz
Memory	512 MB	1 GB
Graphics card	Super VGA	WDDM 1.0-compliant
32 bits per pixel
DirectX 9.0 support
Pixel Shader 2.0 support
Graphics memory	N/A	128 MB
Total HDD capacity	20 GB	40 GB
Free HDD space	15 GB	15 GB
Optical drives	CD-ROM drive	DVD-ROM drive
Others	N/A	TV tuner card (Premium, Ultimate)
Touchscreen (Premium, Business, Ultimate)
USB flash drive (Ultimate)
Trusted Platform Module (Ultimate)
Physical memory limits
The maximum amount of RAM that Windows Vista can support varies, depending on both its edition and its processor architecture, as shown in the table.[119]

Edition	Processor architecture
IA-32	x64
Ultimate	4 GB	128 GB
Enterprise
Business
Home Premium	16 GB
Home Basic	8 GB
Starter	1 GB	N/A
Processor limits
The maximum number of logical processors[120] in a PC that Windows Vista supports is: 32[121] for 32-bit; 64[122] for 64-bit.[123]

The maximum number of physical processors in a PC that Windows Vista supports is: 2 for Business, Enterprise, and Ultimate, and 1 for Starter, Home Basic, and Home Premium.[124]

Updates
Microsoft occasionally releases updates such as service packs for its Windows operating systems to fix bugs, improve performance and add new features.

Service Pack 1
Windows Vista Service Pack 1 (SP1) was released on 4 February 2008, alongside Windows Server 2008 to OEM partners, after a five-month beta test period. The initial deployment of the service pack caused a number of machines to continually reboot, rendering the machines unusable.[125] This temporarily caused Microsoft to suspend automatic deployment of the service pack until the problem was resolved. The synchronized release date of the two operating systems reflected the merging of the workstation and server kernels back into a single code base for the first time since Windows 2000. MSDN subscribers were able to download SP1 on 15 February 2008. SP1 became available to current Windows Vista users on Windows Update and the Download Center on 18 March 2008.[126][127][128] Initially, the service pack only supported five languages – English, French, Spanish, German and Japanese. Support for the remaining 31 languages was released on 14 April 2008.[129]

A white paper, published by Microsoft on 29 August 2007, outlined the scope and intent of the service pack, identifying three major areas of improvement: reliability and performance, administration experience, and support for newer hardware and standards.[130]

One area of particular note is performance. Areas of improvement include file copy operations, hibernation, logging off on domain-joined machines, JavaScript parsing in Internet Explorer, network file share browsing,[127] Windows Explorer ZIP file handling,[131] and Windows Disk Defragmenter.[132] The ability to choose individual drives to defragment is being reintroduced as well.[127]

Service Pack 1 introduced support for some new hardware and software standards, notably the exFAT file system,[127] 802.11n wireless networking, IPv6 over VPN connections, and the Secure Socket Tunneling Protocol.[133]

Booting a system using Extensible Firmware Interface on x64 systems was also introduced;[127] this feature had originally been slated for the initial release of Vista but was delayed due to a lack of compatible hardware at the time. Booting from a GUID Partition Table–based hard drive greater than 2.19 TB is supported (x64 only).[134][135]

Two areas have seen changes in SP1 that have come as the result of concerns from software vendors. One of these is desktop search; users will be able to change the default desktop search program to one provided by a third party instead of the Microsoft desktop search program that comes with Windows Vista, and desktop search programs will be able to seamlessly tie in their services into the operating system.[128] These changes come in part due to complaints from Google, whose Google Desktop Search application was hindered by the presence of Vista's built-in desktop search. In June 2007, Google claimed that the changes being introduced for SP1 "are a step in the right direction, but they should be improved further to give consumers greater access to alternate desktop search providers".[136] The other area of note is a set of new security APIs being introduced for the benefit of antivirus software that currently relies on the unsupported practice of patching the kernel (see Kernel Patch Protection).[137][138]

An update to DirectX 10, named DirectX 10.1,[127] marked mandatory several features that were previously optional in Direct3D 10 hardware. Graphics cards will be required to support DirectX 10.1.[139] SP1 includes a kernel (6001.18000) that matches the version shipped with Windows Server 2008.[140]

The Group Policy Management Console (GPMC) was replaced by the Group Policy Object Editor. An updated downloadable version of the Group Policy Management Console was released soon after the service pack.

SP1 enables support for hotpatching, a reboot-reduction servicing technology designed to maximize uptime. It works by allowing Windows components to be updated (or "patched") while they are still in use by a running process. Hotpatch-enabled update packages are installed via the same methods as traditional update packages, and will not trigger a system reboot.[141]

Service Pack 2
Service Pack 2 for Windows Vista was released to manufacturing on 28 April 2009,[142] and released to Microsoft Download Center and Windows Update on 26 May 2009.[5] In addition to a number of security and other fixes, a number of new features have been added. However, it did not include Internet Explorer 8.[143][144] Windows Vista Service Pack 2 build number is 6002.18005.090410-1830.[4]

Windows Search 4 (available for SP1 systems as a standalone update)
Feature Pack for Wireless adds support for Bluetooth 2.1
Windows Feature Pack for Storage enables the data recording onto Blu-ray media
Windows Connect Now (WCN) to simplify Wi-Fi configuration
Improved support for resuming with active Wi-Fi connections
Improved support for eSATA drives
The limit of 10 half open, outgoing TCP connections introduced in Windows XP SP2 was removed
Enables the exFAT file system to support UTC timestamps, which allows correct file synchronization across time zones
Support for ICCD/CCID smart cards
Support for VIA 64-bit CPUs
Improved performance and responsiveness with the RSS feeds sidebar
Improves audio and video performance for streaming high-definition content
Improves Windows Media Center (WMC) in content protection for TV[145]
Provides an improved power management policy that is approximately 10% more efficient than the original with the default policies[146]
Windows Vista and Windows Server 2008 share a single service pack binary, reflecting the fact that their code bases were joined with the release of Server 2008.[143] Service Pack 2 is not a cumulative update meaning that Service Pack 1 must be installed first.

Platform Update
Platform Update for Windows Vista was released on 27 October 2009. It includes major new components that shipped with Windows 7, as well as updated runtime libraries.[147][148] It requires Service Pack 2 of Windows Vista or Windows Server 2008 and is listed on Windows Update as a Recommended download.

The Platform Update allows application developers to target both Windows Vista and Windows 7. It consists of the following components:

Windows Graphics runtime: Direct2D, DirectWrite, Direct3D 11, DXGI 1.1, and WARP
Updates to Windows Imaging Component
Updates to XPS Print API, XPS Document API and XPS Rasterization Service
Windows Automation API (updates to MSAA and UI Automation)
Windows Portable Devices Platform (adds support for MTP over Bluetooth and MTP Device Services)
Windows Ribbon API
Windows Animation Manager library
Some updates are available as separate releases for both Windows XP and Windows Vista:

Windows Management Framework: Windows PowerShell 2.0, Windows Remote Management 2.0, BITS 4.0
Remote Desktop Connection 7.0 (RDP7) client
Although extensive, the Platform Update does not bring Windows Vista to the level of features and performance offered by Windows 7.[149] For example, even though Direct3D 11 runtime will be able to run on D3D9-class hardware and WDDM drivers using "feature levels" first introduced in Direct3D 10.1, Desktop Window Manager has not been updated to use Direct3D 10.1.[149]

In July 2011, Microsoft released Platform Update Supplement for Windows Vista and Windows Server 2008, which contains several bug fixes and performance improvements.[150]

Marketing campaign
The Mojave Experiment
Main article: The Mojave Experiment
In July 2008, Microsoft introduced a web-based advertising campaign called the "Mojave Experiment", that depicts a group of people who are asked to evaluate the newest operating system from Microsoft, calling it Windows 'Mojave'. Participants are first asked about Vista, if they have used it, and their overall satisfaction with Vista on a scale of 1 to 10. They are then shown a demo of some of the new operating system's features, and asked their opinion and satisfaction with it on the same 1 to 10 scale. After respondents rate "Mojave", they are then told that they were really shown a demo of Windows Vista. The object was to test "A theory: If people could see Windows Vista firsthand, they would like it." According to Microsoft, the initial sample of respondents rated Vista an average of 4.4 out of 10, and Mojave received an average of 8.5, with no respondents rating Mojave lower than they originally rated Windows Vista before the demo.[151][152] The "experiment" has been criticized for deliberate selection of positive statements and not addressing all aspects of Vista.[153]

Reception
Amid the negative reviews and reception, there were also positive reviews of Vista, most notably among PC gamers and the advantages brought about with DirectX 10, which allowed for better gaming performance and more realistic graphics, as well as support for many new capabilities brought about in new video cards and GPUs.[154] However, many DirectX 9 games initially showed a drop in frame rate compared to that experienced in Windows XP. In mid-2008, benchmarks suggested that Vista SP1 was on par with (or better than) Windows XP in terms of game performance.[155] Peter Bright of Ars Technica wrote that, in spite of its delays and feature cuts, Windows Vista is "a huge evolution in the history of the NT platform [...] The fundamental changes to the platform are of a scale not seen since the release of NT."[156] In a continuation of his previous assessment, Bright would go on to state that "Vista is not simply XP with a new skin; core parts of the OS have been radically overhauled, and virtually every area has seen significant refinement. In terms of the magnitude and extent of these changes, Vista represents probably the biggest leap that the NT platform has ever seen. Never before have significant subsystems been gutted and replaced in the way they are in Vista."[157]

Windows Vista received the "Best of CES" award at the Consumer Electronics Show in 2007.[158][159]

In its first year of availability, PC World rated it as the biggest tech disappointment of 2007,[160] and it was rated by InfoWorld as No. 2 of Tech's all-time 25 flops.[161] Microsoft's then much smaller competitor Apple noted that, despite Vista's far greater sales, its own did not seem to have suffered after its release, and would later invest in advertising mocking Vista's unpopularity with users.[162]

Computer manufactures such as Dell, Lenovo, and Hewlett-Packard released their newest computers with Windows Vista pre-installed; however, after the negative reception of the operating system, they also began selling their computers with Windows XP CDs included because of a drop in sales.[163]

Sales
A Gartner research report predicted that Vista business adoption in 2008 would overtake that of XP during the same time frame (21.3% vs. 16.9%)[164] while IDC had indicated that the launch of Windows Server 2008 served as a catalyst for the stronger adoption rates.[165][166] As of January 2009, Forrester Research had indicated that almost one third of North American and European corporations had started deploying Vista.[167] At a May 2009 conference, a Microsoft Vice President said "Adoption and deployment of Windows Vista has been slightly ahead of where we had been with XP" for big businesses.[168][169]

Within its first month, 20 million copies of Vista were sold, double the amount of Windows XP sales within its first month in October 2001, five years earlier.[170] Shortly after however, due to Vista's relatively low adoption rates and continued demand for Windows XP, Microsoft decided to sell Windows XP until 30 June 2008, instead of the previously planned date of 31 January 2008.[171] There were reports of Vista users "downgrading" their operating systems, as well as reports of businesses planning to skip Vista.[172] A study conducted by ChangeWave in March 2008 showed that the percentage of corporate users who were "very satisfied" with Vista was dramatically lower than other operating systems, with Vista at 8%, compared to the 40% who said they were "very satisfied" with Windows XP.[13]

The internet-usage market share for Windows Vista after two years of availability, in January 2009, was 20.61%. This figure combined with World Internet Users and Population Stats yielded a user base of roughly 330 million,[15] which exceeded Microsoft's two-year post launch expectations by 130 million.[14] The internet user base reached before the release of its successor (Windows 7) was roughly 400 million according to the same statistical sources.[citation needed]

Criticism
Main article: Criticism of Windows Vista
Windows Vista has received a number of negative assessments. Criticism targets include protracted development time (5–6 years), more restrictive licensing terms, the inclusion of a number of technologies aimed at restricting the copying of protected digital media,[173] and the usability of the new User Account Control security technology. Moreover, some concerns have been raised about many PCs meeting "Vista Premium Ready" hardware requirements and Vista's pricing.

Hardware requirements
While in 2005 Microsoft claimed "nearly all PCs on the market today will run Windows Vista",[174] the higher requirements of some of the "premium" features, such as the Aero interface, affected many upgraders. According to the UK newspaper The Times in May 2006, the full set of features "would be available to less than 5 percent of Britain's PC market"; however, this prediction was made several months before Vista was released.[175] This continuing lack of clarity eventually led to a class action against Microsoft as people found themselves with new computers that were unable to use the new software to its full potential despite the assurance of "Vista Capable" designations.[176] The court case has made public internal Microsoft communications that indicate that senior executives have also had difficulty with this issue. For example, Mike Nash (Corporate Vice President, Windows Product Management) commented, "I now have a $2,100 e-mail machine" because his laptop's lack of an appropriate graphics chip so hobbled Vista.[177]

Licensing
Criticism of upgrade licenses pertaining to Windows Vista Starter through Home Premium was expressed by Ars Technica's Ken Fisher, who noted that the new requirement of having a prior operating system already installed was going to cause irritation for users who reinstall Windows on a regular basis.[178] It has been revealed that an Upgrade copy of Windows Vista can be installed clean without first installing a previous version of Windows. On the first install, Windows will refuse to activate. The user must then reinstall that same copy of Vista. Vista will then activate on the reinstall, thus allowing a user to install an Upgrade of Windows Vista without owning a previous operating system.[179] As with Windows XP, separate rules still apply to OEM versions of Vista installed on new PCs: Microsoft asserts that these versions are not legally transferable (although whether this conflicts with the right of first sale has yet to be clearly decided legally).[180]

Cost
Initially, the cost of Windows Vista was also a source of concern and commentary. A majority of users in a poll said that the prices of various Windows Vista editions posted on the Microsoft Canada website in August 2006 make the product too expensive.[181] A BBC News report on the day of Vista's release suggested that, "there may be a backlash from consumers over its pricing plans—with the cost of Vista versions in the US roughly half the price of equivalent versions in the UK."[182] Since the release of Vista in 2006, Microsoft has reduced the retail, and upgrade price point of Vista. Originally, Vista Ultimate was priced at $399, and Home Premium Vista at $239. These prices have since been reduced to $319 and $199 respectively.[183]

DRM
Windows Vista supports additional forms of DRM restrictions. One aspect of this is the Protected Video Path, which is designed so that "premium content" from HD DVD or Blu-ray Discs may mandate that the connections between PC components be encrypted. Depending on what the content demands, the devices may not pass premium content over non-encrypted outputs, or they must artificially degrade the quality of the signal on such outputs or not display it at all. Drivers for such hardware must be approved by Microsoft; a revocation mechanism is also included, which allows Microsoft to disable drivers of devices in end-user PCs over the Internet.[184] Peter Gutmann, security researcher and author of the open source cryptlib library, claims that these mechanisms violate fundamental rights of the user (such as fair use), unnecessarily increase the cost of hardware, and make systems less reliable (the "tilt bit" being a particular worry; if triggered, the entire graphic subsystem performs a reset) and vulnerable to denial-of-service attacks.[185] However, despite several requests[186] for evidence supporting such claims Peter Gutmann has never supported his claims with any researched evidence. Proponents have claimed that Microsoft had no choice but to follow the demands of the movie studios, and that the technology will not actually be enabled until after 2010;[187][188] Microsoft also noted that content protection mechanisms have existed in Windows as far back as Windows ME, and that the new protections will not apply to any existing content (only future content).[189]

User Account Control
Although User Account Control (UAC) is an important part of Vista's security infrastructure, as it blocks software from silently gaining administrator privileges without the user's knowledge, it has been widely criticized for generating too many prompts.[190] This has led many Vista UAC users to consider it troublesome, with some consequently either turning the feature off or (for Windows Vista Enterprise or Windows Vista Ultimate users) putting it in auto-approval mode.[191] Responding to this criticism, Microsoft altered the implementation to reduce the number of prompts with SP1.[141] Though the changes have resulted in some improvement, it has not alleviated the concerns completely.[192]

Downgrade rights
For Windows 8 licenses acquired through an OEM, a user may downgrade to the equivalent edition of Windows Vista. Customers licensed for use of Windows 8 Enterprise are generally licensed for Windows 8 Pro, which may be downgraded to Windows Vista Business. End users of licenses of Windows 7 acquired through OEM or volume licensing may downgrade to the equivalent edition of Windows Vista. Downgrade rights are not offered for Starter, Home Basic or Home Premium editions of Windows 7.[193]
